"Truly, I never have seen the market and street so deserted!
How as if it were swept looks the town, or had perished! Not fifty
Are there, methinks, of all our inhabitants in it remaining,
What will not curiosity do! here is every one running,
Hurrying to gaze on the sad procession of pitiful exiles.
Fully a league it must be to the causeway they have to pass over,
Yet all are hurrying down in the dusty heat of the noonday.
I, in good sooth, would not stir from my place to witness the sorrows
Borne by good, fugitive people, who now, with their rescued possessions,
Driven, alas! from beyond the Rhine, their beautiful country,
Over to us are coming, and through the prosperous corner
Roam of this our luxuriant valley, and traverse its windings.
Well hast thou done, good wife, our son in thus kindly dispatching,
Laden with something to eat and to drink, and with store of old linen,
'Mongst the poor folk to distribute; for giving belongs to the wealthy.
How the youth drives, to be sure! What control he has over the horses!
Makes not our carriage a handsome appearance,—the new one? With comfort,
Four could be seated within, with a place on the box for the coachman.
This time, he drove by himself. How lightly it rolled round the corner!"
Thus, as he sat at his ease in the porch of his house on the market,
Unto his wife was speaking mine host of the Golden Lion.
Thereupon answered and said the prudent, intelligent housewife:
"Father, I am not inclined to be giving away my old linen:
Since it serves many a purpose; and cannot be purchased for money,
When we may want it. To-day, however, I gave, and with pleasure,
Many a piece that was better, indeed, in shirts and in bed-clothes;
For I was told of the aged and children who had to go naked.
But wilt thou pardon me, father? thy wardrobe has also been plundered.
And, in especial, the wrapper that has the East-Indian flowers,
Made of the finest of chintz, and lined with delicate flannel,
Gave I away: it was thin and old, and quite out of the fashion."

Thereupon answered and said, with a smile, the excellent landlord:
"Faith! I am sorry to lose it, my good old calico wrapper,
Real East-Indian stuff: I never shall get such another.
Well, I had given up wearing it: nowadays, custom compels us
Always to go in surtout, and never appear but in jacket;
Always to have on our boots; forbidden are night-cap and slippers."
"See!" interrupted the wife; "even now some are yonder returning,
Who have beheld the procession: it must, then, already be over.
Look at the dust on their shoes! and see how their faces are glowing!
Every one carries his kerchief, and with it is wiping the sweat off.
Not for a sight like that would I run so far and so suffer,
Through such a heat; in sooth, enough shall I have in the telling."
Thereupon answered and said, with emphasis, thus, the good father:
"Rarely does weather like this attend such a harvest as this is.
We shall be bringing our grain in dry, as the hay was before it.
Not the least cloud to be seen, so perfectly clear is the heaven;
And, with delicious coolness, the wind blows in from the eastward.
That is the weather to last! over-ripe are the cornfields already;
We shall begin on the morrow to gather our copious harvest."
Constantly, while he thus spoke, the crowds of men and of women
Grew, who their homeward way were over the market-place wending;
And, with the rest, there also returned, his daughters beside him,
Back to his modernized house on the opposite side of the market,
Foremost merchant of all the town, their opulent neighbor,
Rapidly driving his open barouche,—it was builded in Landau.
Lively now grew the streets, for the city was handsomely peopled.
Many a trade was therein carried on, and large manufactures.
Under their doorway thus the affectionate couple were sitting,
Pleasing themselves with many remarks on the wandering people.
Finally broke in, however, the worthy housewife, exclaiming:
"Yonder our pastor, see! is hitherward coming, and with him
Comes our neighbor the doctor, so they shall every thing tell us;
All they have witnessed abroad, and which 'tis a sorrow to look on."

Cordially then the two men drew nigh, and saluted the couple;
Sat themselves down on the benches of wood that were placed in the doorway,
Shaking the dust from their feet, and fanning themselves with their kerchiefs.
Then was the doctor, as soon as exchanged were the mutual greetings,
First to begin, and said, almost in a tone of vexation:
"Such is mankind, forsooth! and one man is just like another,
Liking to gape and to stare when ill-luck has befallen his neighbor.
Every one hurries to look at the flames, as they soar in destruction;
Runs to behold the poor culprit, to execution conducted:
Now all are sallying forth to gaze on the need of these exiles,
Nor is there one who considers that he, by a similar fortune,
May, in the future, if not indeed next, be likewise o'ertaken.
Levity not to be pardoned, I deem; yet it lies in man's nature."
Thereupon answered and said the noble, intelligent pastor;
Ornament he of the town, still young, in the prime of his manhood.
He was acquainted with life,—with the needs of his hearers acquainted;
Deeply imbued he was with the Holy Scriptures' importance,
As they reveal man's destiny to us, and man's disposition;
Thoroughly versed, besides, in best of secular writings.
"I should be loath," he replied, "to censure an innocent instinct,
Which to mankind by good mother Nature has always been given.
What understanding and reason may sometimes fail to accomplish,
Oft will such fortunate impulse, that bears us resistlessly with it.
Did curiosity draw not man with its potent attraction,
Say, would he ever have learned how harmoniously fitted together
Worldly experiences are? For first what is novel he covets;
Then with unwearying industry follows he after the useful;
Finally longs for the good by which he is raised and ennobled.
While he is young, such lightness of mind is a joyous companion,
Traces of pain-giving evil effacing as soon as 'tis over.
He is indeed to be praised, who, out of this gladness of temper,
Has in his ripening years a sound understanding developed;
Who, in good fortune or ill, with zeal and activity labors:
Such an one bringeth to pass what is good, and repaireth the evil."
Then broke familiarly in the housewife impatient, exclaiming:

"Tell us of what ye have seen; for that I am longing to hear of!"
"Hardly," with emphasis then the village doctor made answer,
"Can I find spirits so soon after all the scenes I have witnessed.
Oh, the manifold miseries! who shall be able to tell them?
E'en before crossing the meadows, and while we were yet at a distance,
Saw we the dust; but still from hill to hill the procession
Passed away out of our sight, and we could distinguish but little,
But when at last we were come to the street that crosses the valley,
Great was the crowd and confusion of persons on foot and of wagons.
There, alas! saw we enough of these poor unfortunates passing,
And could from some of them learn how bitter the sorrowful flight was,
Yet how joyful the feeling of life thus hastily rescued.
Mournful it was to behold the most miscellaneous chattels,—
All those things which are housed in every well-furnished dwelling,
All by the house-keeper's care set up in their suitable places,
Always ready for use; for useful is each and important.—
Now these things to behold, piled up on all manner of wagons,
One on the top of another, as hurriedly they had been rescued.
Over the chest of drawers were the sieve and wool coverlet lying;
Thrown in the kneading-trough lay the bed, and the sheets on the mirror.
Danger, alas! as we learned ourselves in our great conflagration
Twenty years since, will take from a man all power of reflection,
So that he grasps things worthless and leaves what is precious behind him.
Here, too, with unconsidering care they were carrying with them
Pitiful trash, that only encumbered the horses and oxen;
Such as old barrels and boards, the pen for the goose, and the bird-cage.
Women and children, too, went toiling along with their bundles,
"Panting 'neath baskets and tubs, full of things of no manner of value:
So unwilling is man to relinquish his meanest possession.
Thus on the dusty road the crowded procession moved forward,
All confused and disordered. The one whose beasts were the weaker,
Wanted more slowly to drive, while faster would hurry another.
Presently went up a scream from the closely squeezed women and children,
And with the yelping of dogs was mingled the lowing of cattle,
Cries of distress from the aged and sick, who aloft on the wagon,

Heavy and thus overpacked, upon beds were sitting and swaying.
Pressed at last from the rut and out to the edge of the highway,
Slipped the creaking wheel; the cart lost its balance, and over
Fell in the ditch. In the swing the people were flung to a distance,
Far off into the field, with horrible screams; by good fortune
Later the boxes were thrown and fell more near to the wagon.
Verily all who had witnessed the fall, expected to see them
Crushed into pieces beneath the weight of trunks and of presses.
So lay the cart all broken to fragments, and helpless the people.
Keeping their onward way, the others drove hastily by them,
Each thinking only of self, and carried away by the current.
Then we ran to the spot, and found the sick and the aged,—
Those who at home and in bed could before their lingering ailments
Scarcely endure,—lying bruised on the ground, complaining and groaning,
Choked by the billowing dust, and scorched by the heat of the noonday."
Thereupon answered and said the kind-hearted landlord, with feeling:
"Would that our Hermann might meet them and give them refreshment and clothing!
Loath should I be to behold them: the looking on suffering pains me.
Touched by the earliest tidings of their so cruel afflictions,
Hastily sent we a mite from out of our super-abundance,
Only that some might be strengthened, and we might ourselves be made easy.
But let us now no longer renew these sorrowful pictures
Knowing how readily fear steals into the heart of us mortals,
And anxiety, worse to me than the actual evil.
Come with me into the room behind, our cool little parlor,
Where no sunbeam e'er shines, and no sultry breath ever enters
Through its thickness of wall. There mother will bring us a flagon
Of our old eighty-three, with which we may banish our fancies.
Here 'tis not cosey to drink: the flies so buzz round the glasses."
Thither adjourned they then, and all rejoiced in the coolness.
Carefully brought forth the mother the clear and glorious vintage,
Cased in a well-polished flask, on a waiter of glittering pewter,
Set round with large green glasses, the drinking cups meet for the Rhine Wine.
So sat the three together about the highly waxed table,
Gleaming and round and brown, that on mighty feet was supported,

Joyously rang at once the glasses of landlord and pastor,
But his motionless held the third, and sat lost in reflection,
Until with words of good-humor the landlord challenged him, saying,—
"Come, sir neighbor, empty your glass, for God in his mercy
Thus far has kept us from evil, and so in the future will keep us.
For who acknowledges not, that since our dread conflagration,
When he so hardly chastised us, he now is continually blessing,
Constantly shielding, as man the apple of his eye watches over,
Holding it precious and dear above all the rest of his members?
Shall he in time to come not defend us and furnish us succor?
Only when danger is nigh do we see how great is his power.
Shall he this blooming town which he once by industrious burghers
Built up afresh from its ashes, and afterwards blessed with abundance,
Now demolish again, and bring all the labor to nothing?"
Cheerfully said in reply the excellent pastor, and kindly:
"Keep thyself firm in the faith, and firm abide in this temper;
For it makes steadfast and wise when fortune is fair, and when evil,
Furnishes sweet consolation and animates hopes the sublimest."
Then made answer the landlord, with thoughts judicious and manly:
"Often the Rhine's broad stream have I with astonishment greeted,
As I have neared it again, after travelling abroad upon business.
Always majestic it seemed, and my mind and spirit exalted.
But I could never imagine its beautiful banks would so shortly
Be to a rampart transformed, to keep from our borders the Frenchman,
And its wide-spreading bed be a moat all passage to hinder.
See! thus nature protects, the stout-hearted Germans protect us,
And thus protects us the Lord, who then will he weakly despondent?
Weary already the combatants, all indications are peaceful.
Would it might be that when that festival, ardently longed for,
Shall in our church be observed, when the sacred Te Deum is rising,
Swelled by the pealing of organ and bells, and the blaring of trumpets,—
Would it might be that that day should behold my Hermann, sir pastor,
Standing, his choice now made, with his bride before thee at the altar,
Making that festal day, that through every land shall be honored,
My anniversary, too, henceforth of domestic rejoicing!

But I observe with regret, that the youth so efficient and active
Ever in household affairs, when abroad is timid and backward.
Little enjoyment he finds in going about among others;
Nay, he will even avoid young ladies' society wholly;
Shuns the enlivening dance which all young persons delight in."
Thus he spoke and listened; for now was heard in the distance
Clattering of horses' hoofs drawing near, and the roll of the wagon,
Which, with furious haste, came thundering under the gateway.

TERPSICHORE
HERMANN
Now when of comely mien the son came into the chamber,
Turned with a searching look the eyes of the preacher upon him,
And, with the gaze of the student, who easily fathoms expression,
Scrutinized well his face and form and his general bearing.
Then with a smile he spoke, and said in words of affection:
"Truly a different being thou comest! I never have seen thee
Cheerful as now, nor ever beheld I thy glances so beaming.
Joyous thou comest, and happy: 'tis plain that among the poor people
Thou hast been sharing thy gifts, and receiving their blessings upon thee."
Quietly then, and with serious words, the son made him answer:
"If I have acted as ye will commend, I know not; but I followed
That which my heart bade me do, as I shall exactly relate you.
Thou wert, mother, so long in rummaging 'mong thy old pieces,
Picking and choosing, that not until late was thy bundle together;
Then too the wine and the beer took care and time in the packing.
When I came forth through the gateway at last, and out on the high-road,
Backward the crowd of citizens streamed with women and children,
Coming to meet me; for far was already the band of the exiles.
Quicker I kept on my way, and drove with speed to the village,
Where they were meaning to rest, as I heard, and tarry till morning.
Thitherward up the new street as I hasted, a stout-timbered wagon,
Drawn by two oxen, I saw, of that region the largest and strongest;
While, with vigorous steps, a maiden was walking beside them,
And, a long staff in her hand, the two powerful creatures was guiding,
Urging them now, now holding them back; with skill did she drive them.
Soon as the maiden perceived me, she calmly drew near to the horses,
And in these words she addressed me: 'Not thus deplorable always
Has our condition been, as to-day on this journey thou seest.
I am not yet grown used to asking gifts of a stranger,
Which he will often unwillingly give, to be rid of the beggar.
But necessity drives me to speak; for here, on the straw, lies
Newly delivered of child, a rich land-owner's wife, whom I scarcely
Have in her pregnancy, safe brought off with the oxen and wagon.

Naked, now in her arms the new-born infant is lying,
And but little the help our friends will be able to furnish,
If in the neighboring village, indeed, where to-day we would rest us,
Still we shall find them; though much do I fear they already have passed it.
Shouldst thou have linen to spare of any description, provided
Thou of this neighborhood art, to the poor in charity give it.'
"Thus she spoke, and the pale-faced mother raised herself feebly
Up from the straw, and towards me looked. Then said I in answer:
'Surely unto the good, a spirit from heaven oft speaketh,
Making them feel the distress that threatens a suffering brother.
For thou must know that my mother, already presaging thy sorrows,
Gave me a bundle to use it straightway for the need of the naked,'
Then I untied the knots of the string, and the wrapper of father's
Unto her gave, and gave her as well the shirts and the linen.
And she thanked me with joy, and cried: 'The happy believe not
Miracles yet can be wrought: for only in need we acknowledge
God's own hand and finger, that leads the good to show goodness,
What unto us he has done through thee, may he do to thee also!
And I beheld with what pleasure the sick woman handled the linens,
But with especial delight the dressing-gown's delicate flannel.
'Let us make haste,' the maid to her said, 'and come to the village,
Where our people will halt for the night and already are resting.
There these clothes for the children I, one and all, straightway will portion.'
Then she saluted again, her thanks most warmly expressing,
Started the oxen; the wagon went on; but there I still lingered,
Still held the horses in check; for now my heart was divided
Whether to drive with speed to the village, and there the provisions
Share 'mong the rest of the people, or whether I here to the maiden
All should deliver at once, for her discreetly to portion.
And in an instant my heart had decided, and quietly driving
After the maiden, I soon overtook her, and said to her quickly:
'Hearken, good maiden;—my mother packed up not linen-stuffs only
Into the carriage, that I should have clothes to furnish the naked;
Wine and beer she added besides, and supply of provisions:
Plenty of all these things I have in the box of the carriage.
But now I feel myself moved to deliver these offerings also

Into thy hand; for so shall I best fulfil my commission.
Thou wilt divide them with judgment, while I must by chance be directed.'
Thereupon answered the maiden: 'I will with faithfulness portion
These thy gifts, that all shall bring comfort to those who are needy.'
Thus she spoke, and quickly the box of the carriage I opened,
Brought forth thence the substantial hams, and brought out the breadstuffs,
Bottles of wine and beer, and one and all gave to the maiden.
Willingly would I have given her more, but the carriage was empty.
All she packed at the sick woman's feet, and went on her journey.
I, with my horses and carriage, drove rapidly back to the city."
Instantly now, when Hermann had ceased, the talkative neighbor
Took up the word, and cried: "Oh happy, in days like the present,
Days of flight and confusion, who lives by himself in his dwelling,
Having no wife nor child to be clinging about him in terror!
Happy I feel myself now, and would not for much be called father;
Would not have wife and children to-day, for whom to be anxious.
Oft have I thought of this flight before; and have packed up together
All my best things already, the chains and old pieces of money
That were my sainted mother's, of which not one has been sold yet.
Much would be left behind, it is true, not easily gotten.
Even the roots and the herbs, that were with such industry gathered,
I should be sorry to lose, though the worth of the goods is but trifling.
If my purveyor remained, I could go from my dwelling contented.
When my cash I have brought away safe, and have rescued my person,
All is safe: none find it so easy to fly as the single."
"Neighbor," unto his words young Hermann with emphasis answered:
"I can in no wise agree with thee here, and censure thy language.
Is he indeed a man to be prized, who, in good and in evil,
Takes no thought but for self, and gladness and sorrow with others
Knows not how to divide, nor feels his heart so impel him?
Rather than ever to-day would I make up my mind to be married:
Many a worthy maiden is needing a husband's protection,
And the man needs an inspiriting wife when ill is impending."
Thereupon smiling the father replied: "Thus love I to hear thee!

That is a sensible word such as rarely I've known thee to utter."
Straightway, however, the mother broke in with quickness, exclaiming:
"Son, to be sure, thou art right! we parents have set the example;
Seeing that not in our season of joy did we choose one another;
Rather the saddest of hours it was that bound us together.
Monday morning—I mind it well; for the day that preceded
Came that terrible fire by which our city was ravaged—
Twenty years will have gone. The day was a Sunday as this is;
Hot and dry was the season; the water was almost exhausted.
All the people were strolling abroad in their holiday dresses,
'Mong the villages partly, and part in the mills and the taverns.
And at the end of the city the flames began, and went coursing
Quickly along the streets, creating a draught in their passage.
Burned were the barns where the copious harvest already was garnered;
Burned were the streets as far as the market; the house of my father,
Neighbor to this, was destroyed, and this one also fell with it.
Little we managed to save. I sat, that sorrowful night through,
Outside the town on the common, to guard the beds and the boxes.
Sleep overtook me at last, and when I again was awakened,
Feeling the chill of the morning that always descends before sunrise,
There were the smoke and the glare, and the walls and chimneys in ruins.
Then fell a weight on my heart; but more majestic than ever
Came up the sun again, inspiring my bosom with courage.
Then I rose hastily up, with a yearning the place to revisit
Whereon our dwelling had stood, and to see if the hens had been rescued,
Which I especially loved, for I still was a child in my feelings.
Thus as I over the still-smoking timbers of house and of court-yard
Picked my way, and beheld the dwelling so ruined and wasted,
Thou camest up to examine the place, from the other direction.
Under the ruins thy horse in his stall had been buried; the rubbish
Lay on the spot and the glimmering beams; of the horse we saw nothing.
Thoughtful and grieving we stood there thus, each facing the other,
Now that the wall was fallen that once had divided our court-yards.
Thereupon thou by the hand didst take me, and speak to me, saying,—
'Lisa, how earnest thou hither? Go back! thy soles must be burning;
Hot the rubbish is here: it scorches my boots, which are stronger.'
And thou didst lift me up, and carry me out through thy court-yard.

There was the door of the house left standing yet with its archway,
Just as 'tis standing now, the one thing only remaining.
Then thou didst set me down and kiss me; to that I objected;
But thou didst answer and say with kindly significant language:
'See! my house lies in ruins: remain here and help me rebuild it;
So shall my help in return be given to building thy father's.'
Yet did I not comprehend thee until thou sentest thy mother
Unto my father, and quick were the happy espousals accomplished.
E'en to this day I remember with joy those half-consumed timbers,
And I can see once more the sun coming up in such splendor;
For 'twas the day that gave me my husband; and, ere the first season
Passed of that wild desolation, a son to my youth had been given.
Therefore I praise thee, Hermann, that thou, with an honest assurance,
Shouldst, in these sorrowful days, be thinking thyself of a maiden,
And amid ruins and war shouldst thus have the courage to woo her."
Straightway, then, and with warmth, the father replied to her, saying:
"Worthy of praise is the feeling, and truthful also the story,
Mother, that thou hast related; for so indeed everything happened.
Better, however, is better. It is not the business of all men
Thus their life and estate to begin from the very foundation:
Every one needs not to worry himself as we and the rest did.
Oh, how happy is he whose father and mother shall give him,
Furnished and ready, a house which he can adorn with his increase.
Every beginning is hard; but most the beginning a household.
Many are human wants, and every thing daily grows dearer,
So that a man must consider the means of increasing his earnings.
This I hope therefore of thee, my Hermann, that into our dwelling
Thou wilt be bringing ere long a bride who is handsomely dowered;
For it is meet that a gallant young man have an opulent maiden.
Great is the comfort of home whene'er, with the woman elected,
Enter the useful presents, besides, in box and in basket.
Not for this many a year in vain has the mother been busy
Making her daughter's linens of strong and delicate texture;
God-parents have not in vain been giving their vessels of silver,
And the father laid by in his desk the rare pieces of money;
For there a day will come when she, with her gifts and possessions,

Shall that youth rejoice who has chosen her out of all others.
Well do I know how good in a house is a woman's position,
Who her own furniture round her knows, in kitchen and chamber;
Who herself the bed and herself the table has covered.
Only a well-dowered bride should I like to receive to my dwelling.
She who is poor is sure, in the end, to be scorned by her husband;
And will as servant be held, who as servant came in with her bundle.
Men will remain unjust when the season of love is gone over.
Yes, my Hermann, thy father's old age thou greatly canst gladden,
If thou a daughter-in-law will speedily bring to my dwelling,
Out of the neighborhood here,—from the house over yonder, the green one.
Rich is the man, I can tell thee. His manufactures and traffic
Daily are making him richer; for whence draws the merchant not profit?
Three daughters only he has, to divide his fortune among them.
True that the eldest already is taken; but there is the second
Still to be had, as well as the third; and not long so, it may be.
I would never have lingered till now, had I been in thy place;
But had fetched one of the maidens, as once I bore off thy dear mother."
Modestly then did the son to the urgent father answer;
"Truly 'twas my wish too, as well as thine own, to have chosen
One of our neighbor's daughters, for we had been brought up together;
Played, in the early days, about the market-place fountain;
And, from the other boys' rudeness, I often have been their defender.
That, though, is long since past: the girls, as they grew to be older,
Properly stayed in the house, and shunned the more boisterous pastimes.
Well brought up are they, surely! I used sometimes to go over,
Partly to gratify thee, and because of our former acquaintance:
But no pleasure I ever could take in being among them;
For I was always obliged to endure their censures upon me.
Quite too long was my coat, the cloth too coarse, and the color
Quite too common; my hair was not cropped, as it should be, and frizzled.
I was resolved, at last, that I, also, would dress myself finely,
Just as those office-boys do who always are seen there on Sundays,
Wearing in summer their half-silken flaps, that dangled about them;
But I discovered, betimes, they made ever a laughing-stock of me.
And I was vexed when I saw it,—it wounded my pride; but more deeply
Felt I aggrieved that they the good-will should so far misinterpret

That in my heart I bore them,—especially Minna the youngest.
It was on Easter-day that last I went over to see them;
Wearing my best new coat, that is now hanging up in the closet,
And having frizzled my hair, like that of the other young fellows.
Soon as I entered, they tittered; but that not at me, as I fancied.
Minna before the piano was seated; the father was present,
Hearing his daughters sing, and full of delight and good-humor.
Much I could not understand of all that was said in the singing;
But of Pamina I often heard, and oft of Tamino:
And I, besides, could not stay there dumb; so, as soon as she ended,
Something about the words I asked, and about the two persons.
Thereupon all were silent and smiled; but the father made answer:
'Thou knowest no one, my friend, I believe, but Adam and Eve?'
No one restrained himself longer, but loud laughed out then the maidens,
Loud laughed out the boys, the old man held his sides for his laughing.
I, in embarrassment, dropped my hat, and the giggling continued,
On and on and on, for all they kept playing and singing.
Back to the house here I hurried, o'ercome with shame and vexation,
Hung up my coat in the closet, and pulled out the curls with my fingers,
Swearing that never again my foot should cross over that threshold.
And I was perfectly right; for vain are the maidens, and heartless.
E'en to this day, as I hear, I am called by them ever 'Tamino.'"
Thereupon answered the mother, and said: "Thou shouldest not, Hermann,
Be so long vexed with the children: indeed, they are all of them children.
Minna, believe me, is good, and was always disposed to thee kindly.
'Twas not long since she was asking about thee. Let her be thy chosen!"
Thoughtfully answered the son: "I know not. That mortification
Stamped itself in me so deeply, I never could bear to behold her
Seated before the piano or listen again to her singing."
Forth broke the father then, and in words of anger made answer:
"Little of joy will my life have in thee! I said it would be so
When I perceived that thy pleasure was solely in horses and farming:
Work which a servant, indeed, performs for an opulent master,
That thou doest; the father meanwhile must his son be deprived of,

Who should appear as his pride, in the sight of the rest of the townsmen.
Early with empty hopes thy mother was wont to deceive me,
When in the school thy studies, thy reading and writing, would never
As with the others succeed, but thy seat would be always the lowest.
That comes about, forsooth, when a youth has no feeling of honor
Dwelling within his breast, nor the wish to raise himself higher.
Had but my father so cared for me as thou hast been cared for;
If he had sent me to school, and provided me thus with instructors,
I should be other, I trow, than host of the Golden Lion!"
Then the son rose from his seat and noiselessly moved to the doorway,
Slowly, and speaking no word. The father, however; in passion
After him called, "Yes, go, thou obstinate fellow! I know thee!
Go and look after the business henceforth, that I have not to chide thee;
But do thou nowise imagine that ever a peasant-born maiden
Thou for a daughter-in-law shalt bring into my dwelling, the hussy!
Long have I lived in the world, and know how mankind should be dealt with;
Know how to entertain ladies and gentlemen so that contented
They shall depart from my house, and strangers agreeably can flatter.
Yet I'm resolved that some day I one will have for a daughter,
Who shall requite me in kind and sweeten my manifold labors;
Who the piano shall play to me, too; so that there shall with pleasure
All the handsomest people in town and the finest assemble,
As they on Sundays do now in the house of our neighbor." Here Hermann
Softly pressed on the latch, and so went out from the chamber.

THALIA
THE CITIZENS
Thus did the modest son slip away from the angry upbraiding;
But in the tone he had taken at first, the father continued:
"That comes not out of a man which he has not in him; and hardly
Shall the joy ever be mine of seeing my dearest wish granted:
That my son may not as his father be, but a better.
What would become of the house, and what of the city if each one
Were not with pleasure and always intent on maintaining, renewing,
Yea, and improving, too, as time and the foreigner teach us!
Man is not meant, forsooth, to grow from the ground like a mushroom,
Quickly to perish away on the spot of ground that begot him,
Leaving no trace behind of himself and his animate action!
As by the house we straightway can tell the mind of the master,
So, when we walk through a city, we judge of the persons who rule it.
For where the towers and walls are falling to ruin; where offal
Lies in heaps in the gutters, and alleys with offal are littered;
Where from its place has started the stone, and no one resets it;
Where the timbers are rotting away, and the house is awaiting
Vainly its new supports,—that place we may know is ill governed.
Since if not from above work order and cleanliness downward,
Easily grows the citizen used to untidy postponement;
Just as the beggar grows likewise used to his ragged apparel.
Therefore I wished that our Hermann might early set out on some travels;
That he at least might behold the cities of Strasburg and Frankfort,
Friendly Mannheim, too, that is cheerful and evenly builded.
He that has once beheld cities so cleanly and large, never after
Ceases his own native city, though small it may be, to embellish.
Do not the strangers who come here commend the repairs in our gateway,
Notice our whitewashed tower, and the church we have newly rebuilded?
Are not all praising our pavement? the covered canals full of water,
Laid with a wise distribution, which furnish us profit and safety,
So that no sooner does fire break out than 'tis promptly arrested?
Has not all this come to pass since the time of our great conflagration?
Builder I six times was named by the council, and won the approval,
Won moreover the heartfelt thanks of all the good burghers,
Actively carrying out what I planned, and also fulfilling

What had by upright men been designed, and left uncompleted.
Finally grew the same zeal in every one of the council;
All now labor together, and firmly decided already
Stands it to build the new causeway that shall with the highroad connect us.
But I am sorely afraid that will not be the way with our children.
Some think only of pleasure and perishable apparel;
Others will cower at home, and behind the stove will sit brooding.
One of this kind, as I fear, we shall find to the last in our Hermann."
Straightway answered and said the good and intelligent mother:
"Why wilt thou always, father, be doing our son such injustice?
That least of all is the way to bring thy wish to fulfilment.
We have no power to fashion our children as suiteth our fancy;
As they are given by God, we so must have them and love them;
Teach them as best we can, and let each of them follow his nature.
One will have talents of one sort, and different talents another.
Every one uses his own; in his own individual fashion,
Each must be happy and good. I will not have my Hermann found fault with;
For he is worthy, I know, of the goods he shall one day inherit;
Will be an excellent landlord, a pattern to burghers and builders;
Neither in council, as I can foresee, will he be the most backward.
But thou keepest shut up in his breast all the poor fellow's spirit,
Finding such fault with him daily, and censuring as thou but now hast."
And on the instant she quitted the room, and after him hurried,
Hoping she somewhere might find him, and might with her words of affection
Cheer him again, her excellent son, for well he deserved it.
Thereupon when she was gone, the father thus smiling continued:
"What a strange folk, to be sure, are these women; and just like the children;
Both of them bent upon living according as suiteth their pleasure,
While we others must never do aught but flatter and praise them.
Once for all time holds good the ancients' trustworthy proverb:
'Whoever goes not forward comes backward.' So must it be always."
Thereupon answered and said, in a tone of reflection, the doctor:
"That, sir neighbor, I willingly grant; for myself I am always
Casting about for improvement,—things new, so they be not too costly.

But what profits a man, who has not abundance of money,
Being thus active and stirring, and bettering inside and outside?
Only too much is the citizen cramped: the good, though he know it,
Has he no means to acquire because too slender his purse is,
While his needs are too great; and thus is he constantly hampered.
Many the things I had done; but then the cost of such changes
Who does not fear, especially now in this season of danger?
Long since my house was smiling upon me in modish apparel!
Long since great panes of glass were gleaming in all of the windows!
But who can do as the merchant does, who, with his resources,
Knows the methods as well by which the best is arrived at?
Look at that house over yonder,—the new one; behold with what splendor
'Gainst the background of green stand out the white spirals of stucco!
Great are the panes in the windows; and how the glass sparkles and glitters,
Casting quite into the shade the rest of the market-place houses!
Yet just after the fire were our two houses the finest,
This of the Golden Lion, and mine of the sign of the Angel.
So was my garden, too, throughout the whole neighborhood famous:
Every traveller stopped and gazed through the red palisadoes,
Caught by the beggars there carved in stone and the dwarfs of bright colors.
Then whosoever had coffee served in the beautiful grotto,—
Standing there now all covered with dust and Partly in ruins,—
Used to be mightily pleased with the glimmering light of the mussels
Spread out in beautiful order; and even the eye of the critic
Used by the sight of my corals and potter's ore to be dazzled.
So in my parlor, too, they would always admire the painting,
Where in a garden are gaily dressed ladies and gentlemen walking,
And with their taper fingers are plucking and holding the flowers.
But who would look at it now! In sooth, so great my vexation
Scarcely I venture abroad. All now must be other and tasteful,
So they call it; and white are the laths and benches of wood-work;
Everything simple and smooth; no carving longer or gilding
Can be endured, and the woods from abroad are of all the most costly.
Well, I too should be glad could I get for myself something novel;
Glad to keep up with the times, and be changing my furniture often;
Yet must we all be afraid of touching the veriest trifle.
For who among us has means for paying the work-people's wages

Lately I had an idea of giving the Archangel Michael,
Making the sign of my shop, another fresh coating of gilding,
And to the terrible dragon about his feet that is winding;
But I e'en let him stay browned as he is: I dreaded the charges."

EUTERPE
MOTHER AND SON
Thus entertaining themselves, the men sat talking. The mother
Went meanwhile to look for her son in front of the dwelling,
First on the settle of stone, whereon 'twas his wont to be seated.
When she perceived him not there, she went farther to look in the stable,
If he were caring perhaps for his noble horses, the stallions,
Which he as colts had bought, and whose care he intrusted to no one.
And by the servant she there was told: He is gone to the garden.
Then with a nimble step she traversed the long, double courtyards,
Leaving the stables behind, and the well-builded barns, too, behind her;
Entered the garden, that far as the walls of the city extended;
Walked through its length, rejoiced as she went in every thing growing;
Set upright the supports on which were resting the branches
Heavily laden with apples, and burdening boughs of the pear-tree.
Next some caterpillars removed from a stout, swelling cabbage;
For an industrious woman allows no step to be wasted.
Thus was she come at last to the end of the far-reaching garden,
Where stood the arbor embowered in woodbine; nor there did she find him,
More than she had hitherto in all her search through the garden.
But the wicket was standing ajar, which out of the arbor,
Once by particular favor, had been through the walls of the city
Cut by a grandsire of hers, the worshipful burgomaster.
So the now dried-up moat she next crossed over with comfort,
Where, by the side of the road, direct the well-fenced vineyard,
Rose with a steep ascent, its slope exposed to the sunshine.
Up this also she went, and with pleasure as she was ascending
Marked the wealth of the clusters, that scarce by their leafage were hidden.
Shady and covered the way through the lofty middlemost alley,
Which upon steps that were made of unhewn blocks you ascended.
There were the Muscatel, and there were the Chasselas hanging
Side by side, of unusual size and colored with purple,
All set out with the purpose of decking the visitor's table;
While with single vine-stocks the rest of the hillside was covered,
Bearing inferior clusters, from which the delicate wine comes.
Thus up the slope she went, enjoying already the vintage,
And that festive day on which the whole country, rejoicing,

Picks and tramples the grapes, and gathers the must into vessels:
Fireworks, when it is evening, from every direction and corner
Crackle and blaze, and so the fairest of harvests is honored.
But more uneasy she went, her son after twice or thrice calling,
And no answer receiving, except from the talkative echo,
That with many repeats rang back from the towers of the city.
Strange it was for her to seek him; he never had gone to a distance
That he told her not first, to spare his affectionate mother
Every anxious thought, and fear that aught ill had befallen.
Still did she constantly hope that, if further she went, she should find him;
For the two doors of the vineyard, the lower as well as the upper,
Both were alike standing open. So now she entered the cornfield,
That with its broad expanse the ridge of the hill covered over.
Still was the ground that she walked on her own; and the crops she rejoiced in,—
All of them still were hers, and hers was the proud-waving grain, too,
Over the whole broad field in golden strength that was stirring.
Keeping the ridgeway, the footpath, between the fields she went onward,
Having the lofty pear-tree in view, which stood on the summit,
And was the boundary-mark of the fields that belonged to her dwelling.
Who might have planted it, none could know, but visible was it
Far and wide through the country; the fruit of the pear-tree was famous.
'Neath it the reapers were wont to enjoy their meal at the noon-day,
And the shepherds were used to tend their flocks in its shadow.
Benches of unhewn stones and of turf they found set about it.
And she had not been mistaken, for there sat her Hermann, and rested,—
Sat with his head on his hand, and seemed to be viewing the landscape
That to the mountains lay: his back was turned to his mother.
Towards him softly she crept, and lightly touched on the shoulder;
Quick he turned himself round: there were tears in his eyes as he met her.
"Mother, how hast thou surprised me!" he said in confusion; and quickly
Wiped the high-spirited youth his tears away. But the mother,
"What! do I find thee weeping, my son?" exclaimed in amazement.
"Nay, that is not like thyself: I never before have so seen thee!
Tell me, what burdens thy heart? what drives thee here, to be sitting
Under the pear-tree alone? These tears in thine eyes, what has brought them?"

Then, collecting himself, the excellent youth made her answer:
"Truly no heart can that man have in his bosom of iron,
Who is insensible now to the needs of this emigrant people;
He has no brains in his head, who not for his personal safety,
Not for his fatherland's weal, in days like the present is anxious.
Deeply my heart had been touched by the sights and sounds of the morning;
Then I went forth and beheld the broad and glorious landscape
Spreading its fertile slopes in every direction about us,
Saw the golden grain inclining itself to the reapers,
And the promise of well-filled barns from the plentiful harvest.
But, alas, how near is the foe! The Rhine with its waters
Guards us, indeed; but, ah, what now are rivers and mountains
'Gainst that terrible people that onward bears like a tempest!
For they summon their youths from every quarter together,
Call up their old men too, and press with violence forward.
Death cannot frighten the crowd: one multitude follows another.
And shall a German dare to linger behind in his homestead?
Hopes he perhaps to escape the everywhere threatening evil?
Nay, dear mother, I tell thee, to-day has made me regretful
That I was lately exempt, when out of our townsmen were chosen
Those who should serve in the army. An only son I am truly,
Also our business is great, and the charge of our household is weighty.
Yet were it better, I deem, in the front to offer resistance
There on the border, than here to await disaster and bondage.
So has my spirit declared, and deep in my innermost bosom
Courage and longing have now been aroused to live for my country,
Yea, and to die, presenting to others a worthy example.
If but the strength of Germany's youth were banded together
There on the frontier, resolved that it never would yield to the stranger,
Ah, he should not on our glorious soil be setting his foot-steps,
Neither consuming before our eyes the fruit of our labor,
Ruling our men, and making his prey of our wives and our daughters.
Hark to me, mother: for I in the depths of my heart am determined
Quickly to do, and at once, what appears to me right and in reason;
For he chooses not always the best who longest considers.
Hearken, I shall not again return to the house; but directly

Go from this spot to the city, and there present to the soldiers
This right arm and this heart, to be spent in the fatherland's service.
Then let my father say if there be no feeling of honor
Dwelling within my breast, nor a wish to raise myself higher."
Then with significant words spoke the good and intelligent mother,
While from her eyes the quick-starting tears were silently falling:
"Son, what change has come o'er thee to-day, and over thy temper,
That thou speakest no more, as thou yesterday didst, and hast always,
Open and free, to thy mother, and tellest exactly thy wishes?
Any one else, had he heard thee thus speak, would in sooth have commended,
And this decision of thine would have highly approved as most noble,
Being misled by thy tone and by thy significant language.
Yet have I nothing but censure to speak; for better I know thee.
Thou concealest thy heart, and thy thoughts are not such as thou tellest.
Well do I know that it is not the drum, not the trumpet that calls thee:
Neither in uniform wouldst thou figure in sight of the maidens;
Since, for all thou art honest and brave, it is thy vocation
Here in quiet to care for the farm and provide for the household.
Tell me honestly, therefore, what goads thee to such a decision?"
Earnestly answered the son: "Nay, thou art mistaken, dear mother:
One day is not like another. The youth matures into manhood:
Better in stillness oft ripening to deeds than when in the tumult
Wildering and wild of existence, that many a youth has corrupted.
And, for as still as I am and was always, there yet in my bosom
Has such a heart been shaped as abhors all wrong and injustice;
And I have learned aright between worldly things to distinguish.
Arm and foot, besides, have been mightily strengthened by labor.
All this, I feel, is true: I dare with boldness maintain it.
Yet dost thou blame me with reason, O mother! for thou hast surprised me
Using a language half truthful and half that of dissimulation.
For, let me honestly own,—it is not the near danger that calls me
Forth from my father's house; nor is it the lofty ambition
Helpful to be to my country, and terrible unto the foeman.
They were but words that I spoke: they only were meant for concealing
Those emotions from thee with which my heart is distracted;
And so leave me, O mother! for, since the wishes are fruitless

Which in my bosom I cherish, my life must go fruitlessly over.
For, as I know, he injures himself who is singly devoted,
When for the common cause the whole are not working together."
"Hesitate not," replied thereupon the intelligent mother,
"Every thing to relate me, the smallest as well as the greatest.
Men will always be hasty, their thoughts to extremes ever running:
Easily out of their course the hasty are turned by a hindrance.
Whereas a woman is clever in thinking of means, and will venture
E'en on a roundabout way, adroitly to compass her object.
Let me know every thing, then; say wherefore so greatly excited
'As I ne'er saw thee before, why thy blood is coursing so hotly,
Wherefore, against thy will, tears are filling thine eyes to o'erflowing."
Then he abandoned himself, the poor boy, to his sorrow, and weeping,
Weeping aloud on his kind mother's breast, he brokenly answered:
"Truly my father's words to-day have wounded me sorely,—
Words which I have not deserved; not to-day, nor at any time have I:
For it was early my greatest delight to honor my parents.
No one knew more, so I deemed, or was wiser than those who begot me,
And had with strictness ruled throughout the dark season of childhood.
Many the things, in truth, I with patience endured from my playmates,
When the good-will that I bore them they often requited with malice.
Often I suffered their flings and their blows to pass unresented;
But if they ventured to ridicule father, when he of a Sunday
Home from Church would come, with his solemn and dignified bearing;
If they made fun of his cap-string, or laughed at the flowers of the wrapper
He with such stateliness wore, which was given away but this morning,—
Threateningly doubled my fist in an instant; with furious passion
Fell I upon them, and struck out and hit, assailing them blindly,
Seeing not where. They howled as the blood gushed out from their noses:
Scarcely they made their escape from my passionate kicking and beating.
Then, as I older grew, I had much to endure from my father;
Violent words he oft vented on me, instead of on others,
When, at the board's last session, the council had roused his displeasure,
And I was made to atone for the quarrels and wiles of his colleagues.
Thou has pitied me often thyself; for much did I suffer,

Ever remembering with cordial respect the kindness of parents,
Solely intent on increasing for us their goods and possessions,
Much denying themselves in order to save for their children.
But, alas! saving alone, for the sake of a tardy enjoyment,—
That is not happiness: pile upon pile, and acre on acre,
Make us not happy, no matter how fair our estates may be rounded.
For the father grows old, and with him will grow old the children,
Losing the joy of the day, and bearing the care of tomorrow.
Look thou below, and see how before us in glory are lying,
Fair and abundant, the corn-fields; beneath them, the vineyard and garden;
Yonder the stables and barns; our beautiful line of possessions.
But when I look at the dwelling behind, where up in the gable
We can distinguish the window that marks my room in the attic;
When I look back, and remember how many a night from that window
I for the moon have watched; for the sun, how many a morning!
When the healthful sleep of a few short hours sufficed me,—
Ah, so lonely they seem to me then, the chamber and courtyard,
Garden and glorious field, away o'er the hill that is stretching;
All so desert before me lie: 'tis the wife that is wanting."
Thereupon spoke the good mother, and thus with intelligence answered:
"Son, not greater thy wish to bring thee a bride to thy chamber,
That thou mayst find thy nights a beautiful part of existence,
And that the work of the day may gain independence and freedom,
Than is thy father's wish too, and thy mother's. We always have counselled,—
Yea, we have even insisted,—that thou shouldst select thee a maiden.
But I was ever aware, and now my heart gives me assurance,
That till the hour appointed is come, and the maiden appointed
Shall with the hour appear, the choice will be left for the future,
While more strong than all else will be fear of grasping the wrong one.
If I may say it, my son, I believe thou already hast chosen;
For thy heart has been touched, and been made more than wontedly tender.
Speak it out honestly, then; for my soul has told me beforehand:
That same maiden it is, the exile, whom thou hast elected."
"Thou has said, mother!" the son thereupon with eagerness answered.
"Yes, it is she; and if I to-day as my bride do not bring her

Home to our dwelling, she from me will go, perhaps vanish for ever,
Lost in the war's confusion and sad movings hither and thither.
Mother, for ever in vain would then our abundant possessions
Prosper before me, and seasons to come be in vain to me fruitful.
Yea, I should hold in aversion the wonted house and the garden:
Even my mother's love, alas! would not comfort my sorrow.
Every tie, so I feel in my heart, by love is unloosened
Soon as she fastens her own; and not the maid is it only
Leaves behind father and mother, to follow the man she has chosen.
He too, the youth, no longer knows aught of mother and father,
When he the maiden, his only beloved, sees vanishing from him.
Suffer me, then, to go hence wherever despair shall impel me:
Since by my father himself the decisive words have been spoken;
Since his house can no longer be mine if he shut out the maiden,
Her whom alone as my bride I desire to bring to our dwelling."
Thereupon quickly made answer the good and intelligent mother:
"How like to rocks, forsooth, two men will stand facing each other!
Proud and not to be moved, will neither draw near to his fellow;
Neither will stir his tongue to utter the first word of kindness.
Therefore I tell thee, my son, a hope yet lives in my bosom,
So she be honest and good, thy father will let thee espouse her,
Even though poor, and against a poor girl so decisive his sentence.
Many a thing he is wont to speak out in his violent fashion
Which he yet never performs; and so what he denies will consent to.
Yet he requires a kindly word, and is right to require it: He is the father!
Besides we know that his wrath after dinner,—
When he most hastily speaks, and questions all others' opinions,—
Signifies naught; the full force of his violent will is excited
Then by the wine, which lets him not heed the language of others;
None but himself does he see and feel. But now is come evening,
Talk upon various subjects has passed between him and his neighbors.
Gentle, he is; I am sure now his little excitement is over,
And he can feel how unjust his passion has made him to others.
Come, let us venture at once: success is alone to the valiant!
Further we need the friends, still sitting together there with him;
And in especial the worthy pastor will give us assistance."

Thus she hastily spoke, and up from the stone then arising,
Drew from his seat her son, who willingly followed. In silence
Both descended the hill, their important purpose revolving.

POLYHYMNIA
THE CITIZEN OF THE WORLD
HERE the three men, however, still sat conversing together,
With mine host of the Lion, the village doctor, and pastor;
And their talk was still on the same unvarying subject,
Turning it this way and that, and viewing from every direction.
But with his sober judgment the excellent pastor made answer:
"Here will I not contradict you. I know that man should be always
Striving for that which is better; indeed, as we see, he is reaching
Always after the higher, at least some novelty craving.
But be careful ye go not too far, for with this disposition
Nature has given us pleasure in holding to what is familiar;
Taught us in that to delight to which we have long been accustomed.
Every condition is good that is founded on reason and nature.
Many are man's desires, yet little it is that he needeth;
Seeing the days are short and mortal destiny bounded.
Ne'er would I censure the man whom a restless activity urges,
Bold and industrious, over all pathways of land and of ocean,
Ever untiring to roam; who takes delight in the riches,
Heaping in generous abundance about himself and his children.
Yet not unprized by me is the quiet citizen also,
Making the noiseless round of his own inherited acres,
Tilling the ground as the ever-returning seasons command him.
Not with every year is the soil transfigured about him;
Not in haste does the tree stretch forth, as soon as 'tis planted,
Full-grown arms towards heaven and decked with plenteous blossoms.
No: man has need of patience, and needful to him are also
Calmness and clearness of mind, and a pure and right understanding.
Few are the seeds he intrusts to earth's all-nourishing bosom;
Few are the creatures he knows how to raise and bring to perfection.
Centred are all his thoughts alone on that which is useful.
Happy to whom by nature a mind of such temper is given,
For he supports us all! And hail, to the man whose abode is
Where in a town the country pursuits with the city are blended.
On him lies not the pressure that painfully hampers the farmer,
Nor is he carried away by the greedy ambition of cities;
Where they of scanty possessions too often are given to aping,

Wives and daughters especially, those who are higher and richer.
Blessed be therefore thy son in his life of quiet employment;
Blessed the wife, of like mind with himself, whom he one day shall choose him."
Thus he spoke; and scarce had he ended when entered the mother,
Holding her son by the hand, and so led him up to her husband.
"Father," she said, "how oft when we two have been chatting together,
Have we rejoiced in the thought of Hermann's future espousal,
When he should bring his bride to be the light of our dwelling!
Over and over again the matter we pondered: this maiden
Fixing upon for him first, and then that, with the gossip of parents.
But that day is now come; and Heaven at last has the maiden
Brought to him hither, and shown him; and now his heart has decided.
Said we not always then he should have his own choice in the matter?
Was it not just now thy wish that he might with lively affection
Feel himself drawn to some maiden? The hour is come that we hoped for.
Yes; he has felt and has chosen and come to a manly decision.
That same maiden it is that met him this morning, the stranger:
Say he may have her, or else, as he swears, his life shall be single."
"Give her me, father," so added the son: "my heart has elected
Clear and sure; she will be to you both the noblest of daughters."
But the father was silent. Then hastily rose the good pastor,
Took up the word and said: "The moment alone is decisive;
Fixes the life of man, and his future destiny settles.
After long taking of counsel, yet only the work of a moment
Every decision must be; and the wise alone seizes the right one.
Dangerous always it is comparing the one with the other
When we are making our choice, and so confusing our feelings.
Hermann is pure. From childhood up I have known him, and never
E'en as a boy was he wont to be reaching for this and the other:
What he desired was best for him too, and he held to it firmly.
Be not surprised and alarmed that now has appeared of a sudden,
What thou hast wished for so long. It is true that the present appearance
Bears not the form of the wish, exactly as thou hadst conceived it:
For our wishes oft hide from ourselves the object we wish for;

Gifts come down from above in the shapes appointed by Heaven.
Therefore misjudge not the maiden who now of thy dearly beloved,
Good and intelligent son has been first to touch the affections:
Happy to whom at once his first love's hand shall be given,
And in whose heart no tenderest wish must secretly languish.
Yes: his whole bearing assures me that now his fate is decided.
Genuine love matures in a moment the youth into manhood;
He is not easily moved; and I fear that if this be refused him,
Sadly his years will go by, those years that should be the fairest,"
Straightway then in a thoughtful tone the doctor made answer,
On whose tongue for a long time past the words had been trembling:
"Pray let us here as before pursue the safe middle course only.
Make haste slowly: that was Augustus the emperor's motto.
Willingly I myself place at my well-beloved neighbor's disposal,
Ready to do him what service I can with my poor understanding.
Youth most especially stands in need of some one to guide it.
Let me therefore go forth that I may examine the maiden,
And may question the people among whom she lives and who know her.
Me 'tis not easy to cheat: I know how words should be valued."
Straightway the son broke in, and with wing'ed words made he answer:
"Do so, neighbor, and go and make thine inquiries; but with thee
I should be glad if our minister here were joined in the errand:
Two such excellent men would be irreproachable judges.
O my father! believe me, she's none of those wandering maidens,
Not one of those who stroll through the land in search of adventure,
And who seek to ensnare inexperienced youth in their meshes.
No: the hard fortunes of war, that universal destroyer,
Which is convulsing the earth and has hurled from its deep foundations
Many a structure already, have sent the poor girl into exile.
Are not now men of high birth, the most noble, in misery roaming?
Princes fly in disguise and kings are in banishment living.
So alas! also is she, the best among all of her sisters,
Driven an exile from home; yet, her personal sorrows forgetting,
She is devoted to others; herself without help, she is helpful.
Great is the want and the suffering over the earth that are spreading:

Shall not some happiness, too, be begotten of all this affliction,
And shall not I in the arms of my wife, my trusted companion,
Look back with joy to the war, as do ye to the great conflagration?"
Outspoke the father then in a tone of decision, and answered:
"Strangely thy tongue has been loosened, my son, which many a year past
Seemed to have stuck in thy mouth, and only to move on compulsion!
I must experience to-day, it would seem, what threatens all fathers,
That the son's headstrong will the mother with readiness favors,
Showing too easy indulgence; and every neighbor sides with them
When there is aught to be carried against the father and husband.
But I will not oppose you, thus banded together: how could I?
For I already perceive here tears and defiance beforehand.
Go ye therefore, inquire, in God's name, bring me the daughter.
But if not so, then the boy is to think no more of the maiden."
Thus the father. The son cried out with joyful demeanor,
"Ere it is evening the noblest of daughters shall hither be brought you,
Such as no man with sound sense in his breast can fail to be pleased with.
Happy, I venture to hope, will be also the excellent maiden.
Yes; she will ever be grateful for having had father and mother
Given once more in you, and such as a child most delights in.
Now I will tarry no longer, but straightway harness the horses,
Drive forth our friends at once on the footsteps of my beloved,
Leaving them then to act for themselves, as their wisdom shall dictate,
Guide myself wholly, I promise, according to what they determine,
And, until I may call her my own, ne'er look on the maiden."
Thus he went forth: the others meanwhile remained in discussion,
Rapid and earnest, considering deeply their great undertaking.
Hermann hasted straightway to the stable, where quietly standing
Found he the spirited stallions, the clean oats quickly devouring,
And the well-dried hay that was cut from the richest of meadows.
On them without delay the shining bits he adjusted,
Hastily drew the straps through the buckles of beautiful plating,
Firmly fastened then the long broad reins, and the horses
Led without to the court-yard, whither the willing assistant

Had with ease, by the pole, already drawn forward the carriage.
Next to the whipple-tree they with care by the neatly kept traces
Joined the impetuous strength of the freely travelling horses.
Whip in hand took Hermann his seat and drove under the doorway.
Soon as the friends straightway their commodious places had taken,
Quickly the carriage rolled off, and left the pavement behind it,
Left behind it the walls of the town and the fresh-whitened towers.
Thus drove Hermann on till he came to the well-known causeway.
Rapidly, loitering nowhere, but hastening up hill and down hill.
But as he now before him perceived the spire of the village,
And no longer remote the garden-girt houses were lying,
Then in himself he thought that here he would rein up the horses.
Under the solemn shade of lofty linden-trees lying,
Which for centuries past upon this spot had been rooted,
Spread in front of the village a broad and grass-covered common,
Favorite place of resort for the peasants and neighboring townsfolk.
Here, at the foot of the trees, sunk deep in the ground was a well-spring;
When you descended the steps, stone benches you found at the bottom,
Stationed about the spring, whose pure, living waters were bubbling
Ceaselessly forth, hemmed in by low walls for convenience of drawing.
Hermann resolved that here he would halt, with his horses and carriage,
Under the shade of the trees. He did so, and said to the others;
"Here alight, my friends, and go your ways to discover
Whether the maiden in truth be worthy the hand that I offer.
That, she is so, I believe; naught new or strange will ye tell me.
Had I to act for myself, I should go with speed to the village,
Where a few words from the maiden's own lips should determine my fortune.
Ye will with readiness single her out from all of the others,
For there can scarcely be one that to her may be likened in bearing.
But I will give you, besides, her modest attire for a token:
Mark, then, the stomacher's scarlet, that sets off the arch of her bosom,
Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fitting close to her figure;
Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
Which with a simple grace her chin's rounded outline encircles;
Freely and lightly rises above it the head's dainty oval;
And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided;

Down from under her bodice, the full, blue petticoat falling,
Wraps itself, when she is walking, about her neatly shaped ankles.
Yet one thing will I say, and would make it my earnest petition,—
Speak not yourselves with the maiden, nor let your intent be discovered;
Rather inquire of others, and hearken to what they may tell you.
When ye have tidings enough to satisfy father and mother,
Then return to me here, and we will consider what further.
So did I plan it all out in my mind while driving you hither."
Thus he spoke. The friends thereupon went their way to the village,
Where, in the houses and gardens and barns, the people were swarming;
Wagons on wagons stood crowded together along the broad highway.
Men for the harnessed horses and lowing cattle were caring,
While the women were busy in drying their clothes on the hedges,
And in the running brook the children were merrily splashing.
Making their way through the pressure of wagons, of people and cattle,
Went the commissioned spies, and to right and to left looked about them,
If they a figure might see that answered the maiden's description;
But not one of them all appeared the beautiful damsel.
Denser soon grew the press. A contest arose round the wagons
'Mongst the threatening men, wherein blended the cries of the women.
Rapidly then to the spot, and with dignified step, came an elder,
Joined the clamoring group, and straightway the uproar was silenced,
As he commanded peace, and rebuked with a fatherly sternness.
"Has, then, misfortune," he cried, "not yet so bound us together,
That we have finally learned to bear and forbear one another,
Though each one, it may be, do not measure his share of the labor?
He that is happy, forsooth, is contentious! Will sufferings never
Teach you to cease from your brawls of old between brother and brother?
Grudge not one to another a place on the soil of the stranger;
Rather divide what ye have, as yourselves, ye would hope to find mercy."
Thus spoke the man and all became silent: restored to good humor,
Peaceably then the people arranged their cattle and wagons.
But when the clergyman now had heard what was said by the stranger,
And had the steadfast mind of the foreign justice discovered,
He to the man drew near and with words of meaning addressed him:

"True it is, father, that when in prosperity people are living,
Feeding themselves from the earth, which far and wide opens her bosom,
And in the years and months renews the coveted blessings,—
All goes on of itself, and each himself deems the wisest,
Deems the best, and so they continue abiding together,
He of greatest intelligence ranking no higher than others;
All that occurs, as if of itself, going quietly forward.
But let disaster unsettle the usual course of existence,
Tear down the buildings about us, lay waste the crops and the garden,
Banish the husband and wife from their old, familiar-grown dwelling,
Drive them to wander abroad through nights and days of privation,—
Then, ah then! we look round us to see what man is the wisest,
And no longer in vain his glorious words will be spoken.
Tell me, art thou not judge among this fugitive people,
Father, who thus in an instant canst bid their passions be quiet?
Thou dost appear to-day as one of those earliest leaders,
Who through deserts and wanderings guided the emigrant nations.
Yea, I could even believe I were speaking with Joshua or Moses."
Then with serious look the magistrate answered him, saying:
"Truly our times might well be compared with all others in strangeness,
Which are in history mentioned, profane or sacred tradition;
For who has yesterday lived and to-day in times like the present,
He has already lived years, events are so crowded together.
If I look back but a little, it seems that my head must be hoary
Under the burden of years, and yet my strength is still active.
Well may we of this day compare ourselves unto that people
Who, from the burning bush, beheld in the hour of their danger
God the Lord: we also in cloud and in fire have beheld him."
Seeing the priest was inclined to speak yet more with the stranger,
And was desirous of learning his story and that of his people,
Privately into his ear his companion hastily whispered:
"Talk with the magistrate further, and lead him to speak of the maiden.
I, however, will wander in search, and as soon as I find her,
Come and report to thee here." The minister nodded, assenting;
And through the gardens, hedges, and barns, went the spy on his errand.

CLIO
THE AGE
Now when the foreign judge had been by the minister questioned
As to his people's distress, and how long their exile had lasted,
Thus made answer the man: "Of no recent date are our sorrows;
Since of the gathering bitter of years our people have drunken,—
Bitterness all the more dreadful because such fair hope had been blighted.
Who will pretend to deny that his heart swelled high in his bosom,
And that his freer breast with purer pulses was beating;
When we beheld the new sun arise in his earliest splendor,
When of the rights of men we heard, which to all should be common,
Were of a righteous equality told, and inspiriting freedom?
Every one hoped that then he should live his own life, and the fetters,
Binding the various lands, appeared their hold to be loosing,—
Fetters that had in the hand of sloth been held and self-seeking.
Looked not the eyes of all nations, throughout that calamitous season,
Towards the world's capital city, for so it had long been considered,
And of that glorious title was now, more than ever, deserving?
"Were not the names of those men who first delivered the message,
Names to compare with the highest that under the heavens are spoken?
Did not, in every man, grow courage and spirit and language?
And, as neighbors, we, first of all, were zealously kindled.
Thereupon followed the war, and armed bodies of Frenchmen
Pressed to us nearer; yet nothing but friendship they seemed to be bringing;
Ay, and they brought it too; for exalted the spirit within them:
They with rejoicing the festive trees of liberty planted,
Promising every man what was his own, and to each his own ruling.
High beat the heart of the youths, and even the aged were joyful;
Gaily the dance began about the newly raised standard.
Thus had they speedily won, these overmastering Frenchmen,
First the spirits of men by the fire and dash of their bearing,
Then the hearts of the women with irresistible graces.
Even the pressure of hungry war seemed to weigh on us lightly,
So before our vision did hope hang over the future,
Luring our eyes abroad into newly opening pathways.

Oh, how joyful the time when with her belov'ed the maiden
Whirls in the dance, the longed-for day of their union awaiting!
But more glorious that day on which to our vision the highest
Heart of man can conceive seemed near and attainable to us.
Loosened was every tongue, and men—the aged, the stripling—
Spoke aloud in words that were full of high feeling and wisdom.
Soon, however, the sky was o'ercast. A corrupt generation
Fought for the right of dominion, unworthy the good to establish;
So that they slew one another, their new-made neighbors and brothers
Held in subjection, and then sent the self-seeking masses against us.
Chiefs committed excesses and wholesale plunder upon us,
While those lower plundered and rioted down to the lowest:
Every one seemed but to care that something be left for the morrow.
Great past endurance the need, and daily grew the oppression:
They were the lords of the day; there was none to hear our complaining.
Then fell trouble and rage upon even the quietest spirit.
One thought only had all, and swore for their wrongs to have vengeance,
And for the bitter loss of their hope thus doubly deluded.
Presently Fortune turned and declared on the side of the German,
And with hurried marches the French retreated before us.
Ah! then as never before did we feel the sad fortunes of warfare:
He that is victor is great and good,—or at least he appears SO,—
And he, as one of his own, will spare the man he has conquered,
Him whose service he daily needs, and whose property uses.
But no law the fugitive knows, save of self-preservation,
And, with a reckless greed, consumes all the possessions about him;
Then are his passions also inflamed: the despair that is in him
Out of his heart breaks forth, and takes shape in criminal action.
Nothing is further held sacred; but all is for plunder. His craving
Turns in fury on woman, and pleasure is changed into horror.
Death he sees everywhere round him, and madly enjoys his last moments,
"Taking delight in blood, in the shrieking of anguish exulting.
Thereupon fiercely arose in our men the stern resolution
What had been lost to avenge, and defend whate'er was remaining,
Every man sprang to his arms, by the flight of the foeman encouraged,
And by his blanching cheeks, and his timorous, wavering glances.

Ceaselessly now rang out the clanging peal of the tocsin.
Thought of no danger to come restrained their furious anger.
Quick into weapons of war the husbandman's peaceful utensils
All were converted; dripped with blood the scythe and the ploughshare.
Quarter was shown to none: the enemy fell without mercy.
Fury everywhere raged and the cowardly cunning of weakness.
Ne'er may I men so carried away by injurious passion
See again! the sight of the raging wild beast would be better.
Let not man prattle of freedom, as if himself he could govern!
Soon as the barriers are torn away, then all of the evil
Seems let loose, that by law had been driven deep back into corners."
"Excellent man!" thereupon with emphasis answered the pastor:
"Though thou misjudgest mankind, yet can I not censure thee for it.
Evil enough, I confess, thou hast had to endure from man's passions,
Yet wouldst thou look behind over this calamitous season,
Thou wouldst acknowledge thyself how much good thou also hast witnessed.
How many excellent things that would in the heart have hidden,
Had not danger aroused them, and did not necessity's pressure
Bring forth the angel in man, and make him a god of deliv'rance."
Thereupon answered and said the reverend magistrate, smiling:
"There thou remindest me aptly of how we console the poor fellow,
After his house has been burned, by recounting the gold and the silver
Melted and scattered abroad in the rubbish, that still is remaining.
Little enough, it is true; but even that little is precious.
Then will the poor wretch after it dig and rejoice if he find it.
Thus I likewise with happier thoughts will gratefully turn me
Towards the few beautiful deeds of which I preserve the remembrance.
Yes, I will not deny, I have seen old quarrels forgotten,
Ill to avert from the state; I also have witnessed how friendship,
Love of parent and child, can impossibilities venture;
Seen how the stripling at once matured into man; how the aged
Grew again young; and even the child into youth was developed,
Yea, and the weaker sex too, as we are accustomed to call it,
Showed itself brave and strong and ready for every emergence.
Foremost among them all, one beautiful deed let me mention,

Bravely performed by the hand of a girl, an excellent maiden;
Who, with those younger than she, had been left in charge of a farmhouse,
Since there, also, the men had marched against the invader.
Suddenly fell on the house a fugitive band of marauders,
Eager for booty, who crowded straightway to the room of the women.
"There they beheld the beautiful form of the fully grown maiden,
Looked on the charming young girls, who rather might still be called children.
Savage desire possessed them; at once with merciless passion
They that trembling band assailed and the high-hearted maiden.
But she had snatched in an instant the sword of one from its scabbard,
Felled him with might to the ground, and stretched him bleeding before her.
Then with vigorous strokes she bravely delivered the maidens,
Smiting yet four of the robbers; who saved themselves only by flying.
Then she bolted the gates, and, armed, awaited assistance."
Now when this praise the minister heard bestowed on the maiden,
Rose straightway for his friend a feeling of hope in his bosom,
And he had opened his lips to inquire what further befell her,
If on this mournful flight she now with her people were present;
When with a hasty step the village doctor approached them,
Twitched the clergyman's coat, and said in his ear in a whisper:
"I have discovered the maiden at last among several hundreds;
By the description I knew her, so come, let thine own eyes behold her!
Bring too the magistrate with thee, that so we may hear him yet further."
But as they turned to go, the justice was summoned to leave them,
Sent for by some of his people by whom his counsel was needed.
Straightway the preacher, however, the lead of the doctor had followed
Up to a gap in the fence where his finger he meaningly pointed.
"Seest thou the maiden?" he said: "she has made some clothes for the baby
Out of the well-known chintz,—I distinguish it plainly; and further
There are the covers of blue that Hermann gave in his bundle.
Well and quickly, forsooth, she has turned to advantage the presents.
Evident tokens are these, and all else answers well the description.
Mark how the stomacher's scarlet sets off the arch of her bosom,
Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fits close to her figure;

Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
Which, with a simple grace, her chin's rounded outline encircles;
Freely and lightly rises above it the bead's dainty oval,
And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided.
Now she is sitting, yet still we behold her majestical stature,
And the blue petticoat's ample plaits, that down from her bosom
Hangs in abundant folds about her neatly shaped ankles,
She without question it is; come, therefore, and let us discover
Whether she honest and virtuous be, a housewifely maiden."
Then, as the seated figure he studied, the pastor made answer:
"Truly, I find it no wonder that she so enchanted the stripling,
Since, to a man's experienced eye, she seems lacking in nothing.
Happy to whom mother Nature a shape harmonious has given!
"Such will always commend him, and he can be nowhere a stranger.
All approach with delight, and all are delighted to linger,
If to the outward shape correspond but a courteous spirit.
I can assure thee, in her the youth has found him a maiden,
Who, in the days to come, his life shall gloriously brighten,
Standing with womanly strength in every necessity by him.
Surely the soul must be pure that inhabits a body so perfect,
And of a happy old age such vigorous youth is the promise."
Thereupon answered and said the doctor in language of caution:
"Often appearances cheat; I like not to trust to externals.
For I have oft seen put to the test the truth of the proverb:
Till thou a bushel of salt with a new acquaintance hast eaten,
Be not too ready to trust him; for time alone renders thee certain
How ye shall fare with each other, and how well your friendship shall prosper.
Let us then rather at first make inquiries among the good people
By whom the maiden is known, and who can inform us about her."
"Much I approve of thy caution," the preacher replied as he followed.
"Not for ourselves is the suit, and 'tis delicate wooing for others."
Towards the good magistrate, then, the men directed their footsteps,

Who was again ascending the street in discharge of his duties.
Him the judicious pastor at once addressed and with caution.
"Look! we a maiden have here descried in the neighboring garden,
Under an apple-tree sitting, and making up garments for children
"Out of second-hand stuff that somebody doubtless has given;
And we were pleased with her aspect: she seems like a girl to be trusted.
Tell us whatever thou knowest: we ask it with honest intentions."
Soon as the magistrate nearer had come, and looked into the garden,
"Her thou knowest already," he said; "for when I was telling
Of the heroic deed performed by the hand of that maiden,
When she snatched the man's sword, and delivered herself and her charges,
This was the one! she is vigorous born, as thou seest by her stature;
Yet she is good as strong, for her aged kinsman she tended
Until the day of his death, which was finally hastened by sorrow
Over his city's distress, and his own endangered possessions.
Also, with quiet submission, she bore the death of her lover,
Who a high-spirited youth, in the earliest flush of excitement,
Kindled by lofty resolve to fight for a glorious freedom,
Hurried to Paris, where early a terrible death he encountered.
For as at home, so there, his foes were deceit and oppression."
Thus the magistrate spoke. The others saluted and thanked him,
And from his purse a gold-piece the pastor drew forth:—for the silver
He had some hours before already in charity given,
When he in mournful groups had seen the poor fugitives passing;—
And to the magistrate handed it, saying: "Apportion the money
'Mongst thy destitute people, and God vouchsafe it an increase."
But the stranger declined it, and, answering, said: "We have rescued
Many a dollar among us, with clothing and other possessions,
And shall return, as I hope, ere yet our stock is exhausted."
Then the pastor replied, and pressed the money upon him:
"None should be backward in giving in days like the present, and no one
Ought to refuse to accept those gifts which in kindness are offered.

None can tell how long he may hold what in peace he possesses,
None how much longer yet he shall roam through the land of the stranger,
And of his farm be deprived, and deprived of the garden that feeds him."
"Ay, to be sure!" in his bustling way interrupted the doctor:
"If I had only some money about me, ye surely should have it,
Little and big; for certainly many among you must need it.
Yet I'll not go without giving thee something to show what my will is,
Even though sadly behind my good-will must lag the performance."
Thus, as he spoke, by its straps his embroidered pocket of leather,
Where his tobacco was kept, he drew forth,—enough was now in it
Several pipes to fill,—and daintily opened, and portioned.
"Small is the gift," he added. The justice, however, made answer:
"Good tobacco can ne'er to the traveller fail to be welcome."
Then did the village doctor begin to praise his canister.
But the clergyman drew him away, and they quitted the justice.
"Let us make haste," said the thoughtful man: "the youth's waiting in torture;
Come I let him hear, as soon as he may, the jubilant tidings."
So they hastened their steps, and came to where under the lindens
Hermann against the carriage was leaning. The horses were stamping
Wildly the turf; he held them in check, and, buried in musing,
Stood, into vacancy gazing before him; nor saw the two envoys,
Till, as they came, they called out and made to him signals of triumph.
E'en as far off as they then were, the doctor began to address him;
But they were presently nearer come and then the good pastor
Grasped his hand and exclaimed, interrupting the word of his comrade:
"Hail to thee, O young man! thy true eye and heart have well chosen;
Joy be to thee and the wife of thy youth; for of thee she is worthy.
Come then and turn us the wagon, and drive straightway to the village,
There the good maid to woo, and soon bring her home to thy dwelling."
Still, however, the young man stood, without sign of rejoicing
Hearing his messenger's words, though heavenly they were and consoling.
Deeply he sighed as he said: "With hurrying wheels we came hither,
And shall be forced, perchance, to go mortified homeward and slowly.

For disquiet has fallen upon me since here I've been waiting,
Doubt and suspicion and all that can torture the heart of a lover.
Think ye we have but to come, and that then the maiden will follow
Merely because we are rich, while she is poor and an exile?
"Poverty, too, makes proud, when it comes unmerited! Active
Seems she to be, and contented, and so of the world is she mistress.
Think ye a maiden like her, with the manners and beauty that she has,
Can into woman have grown, and no worthy man's love have attracted?
Think ye that love until now can have been shut out from her bosom?
Drive not thither too rashly: we might to our mortification
Have to turn softly homewards our horses' heads. For my fear is
That to some youth already this heart has been given; already
This brave hand has been clasped, has pledged faith to some fortunate lover.
Then with my offer, alas! I should stand in confusion before her."
Straightway the pastor had opened his lips to speak consolation,
When his companion broke in, and said in his voluble fashion:
"Years ago, forsooth, unknown had been such a dilemma.
All such affairs were then conducted in regular fashion.
Soon as a bride for their son had been by the parents selected,
First some family friend they into their councils would summon,
Whom they afterwards sent as a suitor to visit the parents
Of the elected bride. Arrayed in his finest apparel,
Soon after dinner on Sunday he sought the respectable burgher,
When some friendly words were exchanged upon general subjects,
He knowing how to direct the discourse as suited his purpose.
After much circumlocution he finally mentioned the daughter,
Praising her highly; and praising the man and the house that had sent him.
Persons of tact perceived his intent, and the politic envoy
Readily saw how their minds were disposed, and explained himself further.
Then were the offer declined, e'en the 'no' brought not mortification;
But did it meet with success, the suitor was ever thereafter
Made the chief guest in the house on every festive occasion.
For, through the rest of their lives, the couple ne'er failed to remember
That 'twas by his experienced hand the first knot had been gathered.
All that, however, is changed, and, with many another good custom,

Quite fallen out of the fashion; for every man woos for himself now.
Therefore let every man hear to his face pronounced the refusal,
If a refusal there be, and stand shamed in the sight of the maiden!"
"Let that be as it may!" made answer the youth, who had scarcely
Unto the words paid heed; but in silence had made his decision.
"I will go thither myself, will myself hear my destiny spoken
Out of the lips of a maiden in whom I a confidence cherish
Greater than heart of man has e'er before cherished in woman.
Say what she will, 'twill be good and wise; of that I am certain.
Should I behold her never again, yet this once will I see her;
Yet this once the clear gaze of those dark eyes will encounter,
If I must press her ne'er to my heart, yet that neck and that bosom
Will I behold once more, that my arm so longs to encircle;
Once more that mouth will see, whose kiss and whose 'yes' would for ever
Render me happy, from which a 'no' will for ever destroy me.
But ye must leave me alone. Do not wait for me here; but return ye
Back to my father and mother again, and give them the knowledge
That their son has not been deceived, that the maiden is worthy.
So then leave me alone! I shall follow the footpath that crosses
Over the hill by the pear-tree, and thence descends through our vineyard,
Taking a shorter way home. And oh, may I bring to our dwelling,
Joyful and quick my beloved! but perhaps I alone may come creeping
Over that path to the house, and ne'er again tread it with gladness."
Thus he spoke, and gave up the reins to the hand of the pastor,
Who understandingly grasped them, the foaming horses controlling,
Speedily mounted the carriage, and sat in the seat of the driver.
But thou didst hesitate, provident neighbor, and say in remonstrance:
"Heart and soul and spirit, my friend, I willingly trust thee;
But as for life and limb, they are not in the safest of keeping,
When the temporal reins are usurped by the hand of the clergy."
But thou didst laugh at his words, intelligent pastor, and answer:
"Sit thee down, and contentedly trust me both body and spirit;
For, in holding the reins, my hand grew long ago skilful,

Long has my eye been trained in making the nicest of turnings;
For we were practised well in driving the carriage in Strasburg,
When I the youthful baron accompanied thither; then daily
Rolled the carriage, guided by me, through the echoing gateway,
Out over dusty roads till we reached the meadows and lindens,
Steering through groups of the town's-folk beguiling the day there with walking."
Thereupon, half-reassured, the neighbor ascended the wagon,
Sat like one who for a prudent leap is holding him ready,
And the stallions sped rapidly homeward, desiring their stable.
Clouds of dust whirled up from under their powerful hoofbeats.
Long the youth stood there yet, and saw the dust in its rising,
Saw the dust as it settled again: he stood there unheeding.

ERATO
DOROTHEA
Like as the traveller, who, when the sun is approaching its setting,
Fixes his eyes on it once again ere quickly it vanish,
Then on the sides of the rocks, and on all the darkening bushes,
Sees its hovering image; whatever direction he look in
That hastes before, and flickers and gleams in radiant colors,—
So before Hermann's eyes moved the beautiful shape of the maiden
Softly, and seeming to follow the path that led into the cornfield.
But he aroused from his wildering dream and turned himself slowly
Towards where the village lay and was wildered again; for again came
Moving to meet him the lofty form of the glorious maiden.
Fixedly gazed he upon her; herself it was and no phantom.
Bearing in either hand a larger jar and a smaller,
Each by the handle, with busy step she came on to the fountain.
Joyfully then he hastened to meet her; the sight of her gave him
Courage and strength; and thus the astonished girl he accosted:
"Do I then find thee, brave-hearted maiden, so soon again busy,
Rendering aid unto others, and happy in bringing them comfort?
Say why thou comest alone to this well which lies at such a distance,
When all the rest are content with the water they find in the village?
This has peculiar virtues, 'tis true; and the taste is delicious.
Thou to that mother wouldst bring it, I trow, whom thy faithfulness rescued."
Straightway with cordial greeting the kindly maiden made answer:
"Here has my walk to the spring already been amply rewarded,
Since I have found the good friend who bestowed so abundantly on us;
For a pleasure not less than the gifts is the sight of the giver.
Come, I pray thee, and see for thyself who has tasted thy bounty;
Come, and the quiet thanks receive of all it has solaced.
But that thou straightway the reason mayst know for which I am hither
Come to draw, where pure and unfailing the water is flowing,
This I must tell thee,—that all the water we have in the village
Has by improvident people been troubled with horses and oxen
Wading direct through the source which brings the inhabitants water.
And furthermore they have also made foul with their washings and rinsings

All the troughs of the village, and all the fountains have sullied;
For but one thought is in all, and that how to satisfy quickest
Self and the need of the moment, regardless of what may come after."
Thus she spoke, and the broad stone steps meanwhile had descended
With her companion beside her, and on the low wall of the fountain
Both sat them down. She bent herself over to draw, and he also
Took in his hand the jar that remained, and bent himself over,
And in the blue of the heavens, they, seeing their image reflected,
Friendly greetings and nods exchanged in the quivering mirror.
"Give me to drink," the youth thereupon in his gladness petitioned,
And she handed the pitcher. Familiarly sat they and rested,
Both leaning over their jars, till she presently asked her companion:
"Tell me, why I find thee here, and without thy horses and wagon,
Far from the place where I met thee at first? how camest thou hither?"
Thoughtful he bent his eyes on the ground, then quietly raised them
Up to her face, and, meeting with frankness the gaze of the maiden,
Felt himself solaced and stilled. But then impossible was it,
That he of love should speak; her eye told not of affection,
Only of clear understanding, requiring intelligent answer.
And he composed himself quickly, and cordially said to the maiden:
"Hearken to me, my child, and let me reply to thy question.
'Twas for thy sake that hither I came; why seek to conceal it?
Know I live happy at home with both my affectionate parents,
Faithfully giving my aid their house and estates in directing,
Being an only son, and because our affairs are extensive.
Mine is the charge of the farm; my father bears rule in the household;
While the presiding spirit of all is the diligent mother.
But thine experience doubtless has taught thee how grievously servants,
Now through deceit, and now through their carelessness, harass the mistress,
Forcing her ever to change and replace one fault with another.
Long for that reason my mother has wished for a maid in the household,
Who not with hand alone, but with heart, too, will lend her assistance,
Taking the daughter's place, whom, alas! she was early deprived of.
How when to-day by the wagon I saw thee, so ready and cheerful,

Witnessed the strength of thine arms, and thy limbs of such healthful proportion,
When thy intelligent speech I heard, I was smitten with wonder.
Hastening homeward, I there to my parents and neighbors the stranger
Praised as she well deserved. But I now am come hither to tell thee
What is their wish as mine.—Forgive me my stammering language."
"Hesitate not," she, answering, said, "to tell me what follows.
Thou dost not give me offence; I have listened with gratitude to thee:
Speak it out honestly therefore; the sound of it will not alarm me.
Thou wouldst engage me as servant to wait on thy father and mother,
And to look after the welt-ordered house of which ye are the owners;
And thou thinkest in me to find them a capable servant,
One who is skilled in her work, and not of a rude disposition.
Short thy proposal has been, and short shall be also my answer.
Yes, I will go with thee home, and the call of fate I will follow.
Here my duty is done: I have brought the newly made mother
Back to her kindred again, who are all in her safety rejoicing.
Most of our people already are gathered; the others will follow.
All think a few days more will certainly see them returning
Unto their homes; for such is the exile's constant delusion.
But by no easy hope do I suffer myself to be cheated
During these sorrowful days which promise yet more days of sorrow.
All the bands of the world have been loosed, and what shall unite them,
Saving alone the need, the need supreme, that is on us?
If in a good man's house I can earn my living by service,
Under the eye of an excellent mistress, I gladly will do it;
Since of doubtful repute, must be always a wandering maiden.
Yes, I will go with thee, soon as I first shall have carried the pitchers
Back to my friends, and prayed the good people to give me their blessing.
Come thou must see them thyself, and from their hands must receive me."
Joyfully hearkened the youth to the willing maiden's decision,
Doubtful whether he ought not at once to make honest confession.
Yet it appeared to him best to leave her awhile in her error,
Nor for her love to sue, before leading her home to his dwelling.
Ah! and the golden ring he perceived on the hand of the maiden,
Wherefore he let her speak on, and gave diligent ear to her language.

"Come," she presently said, "Let us back to the village; for maidens
Always are sure to be blamed if they tarry too long at the fountain.
Yet how delightful it is to chat by the murmuring water!"
Then from their seats they rose, and both of them turned to the fountain
One more look behind, and a tender longing possessed them.
Both of the water-jars then in silence she took by the handle,
Carried them up the steps, while behind her followed her lover.
One of the pitchers he begged her to give him to lighten the burden.
"Nay, let it be!" she said: "I carry them better so balanced.
Nor shall the master, who is to command, be doing me service.
Look not so gravely upon me, as thinking my fortune a hard one.
Early a woman should learn to serve, for that is her calling;
Since through service alone she finally comes to the headship,
Comes to the due command that is hers of right in the household.
Early the sister must wait on her brother, and wait on her parents;
Life must be always with her a perpetual coming and going,
Or be a fetching and carrying, making and doing for others.
Happy for her be she wonted to think no way is too grievous,
And if the hours of the night be to her as the hours of the daytime;
If she find never a needle too fine, nor a labor too trifling;
Wholly forgetful of self, and caring to live but in others!
For she will surely, as mother, have need of every virtue,
When, in the time of her illness, the cries of her infant arouse her
Calling for food from her weakness, and cares are to suffering added.
Twenty men bound into one were not able to bear such a burden;
Nor is it meant that they should, yet should they with gratitude view it."
Thus she spoke, and was come, meanwhile, with her silent companion,
Far as the floor of the barn, at the furthermost end of the garden,
Where was the sick woman lying, whom, glad, she had left with her daughters,
Those late rescued maidens: fair pictures of innocence were they.
Both of them entered the barn; and, e'en as they did so, the justice,
Leading a child in each hand, came in from the other direction.
These had been lost, hitherto, from the sight of their sorrowing mother;
But in the midst of the crowd the old man now had descried them.

Joyfully sprang they forward to meet their dear mother's embraces,
And to salute with delight their brother, their unknown companion.
Next upon Dorothea they sprang with affectionate greeting,
Asking for bread and fruit, but more than all else for some water.
So then she handed the water about; and not only the children
Drank, but the sick woman too, and her daughters, and with them the justice.
All were refreshed, and highly commended the glorious water;
Acid it was to the taste, and reviving, and wholesome to drink of.
Then with a serious face the maiden replied to them, saying:
"Friends, for the last time now to your mouth have I lifted my pitcher;
And for the last time by me have your lips been moistened with water.
But henceforth in the heat of the day when the draught shall refresh you,
When in the shade ye enjoy your rest beside a clear fountain,
Think of me then sometimes and of all my affectionate service,
Prompted more by my love than the duty I owed you as kindred.
I shall acknowledge as long as I live the kindness ye've shown me.
'Tis with regret that I leave you; but every one now is a burden,
More than a help to his neighbor, and all must be finally scattered
Far through a foreign land, if return to our homes be denied us.
See, here stands the youth to whom we owe thanks for the presents.
He gave the cloak for the baby, and all these welcome provisions.
Now he is come, and has asked me if I will make one in his dwelling,
That I may serve therein his wealthy and excellent parents.
And I refuse not the offer; for maidens must always be serving;
Burdensome were it for them to rest and be served in the household.
Therefore I follow him gladly. A youth of intelligence seems he,
And so will also the parents be, as becometh the wealthy.
So then farewell, dear friend; and mayst thou rejoice in thy nursling,
Living, and into thy face already so healthfully looking!
When thou shalt press him against thy breast in these gay-colored wrappings,
Oh, then remember the kindly youth who bestowed them upon us,
And who me also henceforth, thy sister, will shelter and nourish.
Thou, too, excellent man!" she said as she turned to the justice;
"Take my thanks that in many a need I have found thee a father."
Then she knelt down on the floor by the side of the newly made mother,
Kissing the weeping woman, and taking her low-whispered blessing.

Thou, meanwhile, worshipful justice, wast speaking to Hermann and saying:
"Justly mayst thou, my friend, be counted among the good masters,
Careful to manage their household affairs with capable servants.
For I have often observed how in sheep, as in horses and oxen,
Men conclude never a bargain without making closest inspection,
While with a servant who all things preserves, if honest and able,
And who will every thing lose and destroy, if he set to work falsely,
Him will a chance or an accident make us admit to our dwelling,
And we are left, when too late, to repent an o'er hasty decision.
Thou understandest the matter it seems; because thou hast chosen,
Thee and thy parents to serve in the house, a maid who is honest.
Hold her with care; for as long as thy household is under her keeping,
Thou shalt not want for a sister, nor yet for a daughter thy parents."
Many were come, meanwhile, near relatives all of the mother,
Bringing her various gifts, and more suitable quarters announcing.
All of them, hearing the maiden's decision, gave Hermann their blessing,
Coupled with glances of meaning, while each made his special reflections.
Hastily one and another would say in the ear of his neighbor:
"If in the master a lover she find, right well were she cared for."
Hermann took her at last by the hand, and said as he did so:
"Let us be going; the day is declining, and distant the city."
Eager and voluble then the women embraced Dorothea;
Hermann drew her away; but other adieus must be spoken:
Lastly the children with cries fell upon her and terrible weeping,
Clung to her garments, and would not their dear second mother should leave them.
But in a tone of command the women said, one and another:
"Hush now, children, she's going to the town, and will presently bring you
Plenty of nice sweet cake that was by your brother bespoken
When by the stork just now he was brought past the shop of the baker.
Soon you will see her come back with sugar-plums splendidly gilded."
Then did the little ones loose their hold, and Hermann, though hardly,
Tore her from further embraces away, and far-waving kerchiefs.

MELPOMENE
HERMANN AND DOROTHEA
Towards the setting sun the two thus went on their journey:
Close he had wrapped himself round with clouds portending a tempest.
Out from the veil, now here and now there, with fiery flashes,
Gleaming over the field shot forth the ominous lightning.
"May not these threatening heavens," said Hermann, "be presently sending
Hailstones upon us and violent rains; for fair is the harvest."
And in the waving luxuriant grain they delighted together:
Almost as high it reached as the lofty shapes that moved through it.
Thereupon spoke the maiden, and said to her guide and companion:
"Friend, unto whom I soon am to owe so kindly a fortune,
Shelter and home, while many an exile's exposed to the tempest,
Tell me concerning thy parents, I pray thee, and teach me to know them,
Them whom with all my heart I desire to serve in the future.
Who understands his master, more easily gives satisfaction,
Having regard to the things which to him seem chief in importance,
And on the doing of which his firm-set mind is determined.
Tell me therefore, I pray, how to win thy father and mother."
And to her question made answer the good and intelligent Hermann:
"Ah, what wisdom thou showest, thou good, thou excellent maiden,
Asking thus first of all concerning the tastes of my parents!
Know that in vain hitherto I have labored in serving my father,
Taking upon me as were it my own, the charge of the household;
Early and late at work in the fields, and o'erseeing the vineyard.
But my mother I fully content, who can value my service;
And thou wilt also appear in her eyes the worthiest of maidens,
If for the house thou carest, as were it thine own thou wast keeping.
Otherwise is it with father, who cares for the outward appearance.
Do not regard me, good maiden, as one who is cold and unfeeling,
That unto thee a stranger I straightway discover my father.
Nay, I assure thee that never before have words such as these are
Freely dropped from my tongue, which is not accustomed to prattle;
But from out of my bosom thou lurest its every secret.

Some of the graces of life my good father covets about him,
Outward signs of affection he wishes, as well as of honor;
And an inferior servant might possibly give satisfaction,
Who could turn these to account, while he might be displeased with a better."
Thereupon said she with joy, the while her hastening footsteps
Over the darkening pathway with easy motion she quickened:
"Truly I hope to them both I shall equally give satisfaction:
For in thy mother's nature I find such an one as mine own is,
And to the outward graces I've been from my childhood accustomed.
Greatly was courtesy valued among our neighbors the Frenchmen,
During their earlier days; it was common to noble and burgher,
As to the peasant, and every one made it the rule of his household.
So, on the side of us Germans, the children were likewise accustomed
Daily to bring to their parents, with kissing of hands and with curtseys,
Morning good-wishes, and all through the day to be prettily mannered.
Every thing thus that I learned, and to which I've been used from my childhood,
All that my heart shall suggest, shall be brought into play for thy father.
But who shall tell me of thee, and how thyself shouldst be treated,
Thou the only son of the house, and henceforth my master?"
Thus she said, and e'en as she spoke they stood under the pear-tree.
Down from the heavens the moon at her full was shedding her splendor.
Night had come on, and wholly obscured was the last gleam of sunlight,
So that contrasting masses lay side by side with each other,
Clear and bright as the day, and black with the shadows of midnight;
Gratefully fell upon Hermann's ear the kindly asked question
Under the shade of the glorious tree, the spot he so treasured,
Which but this morning had witnessed the tears he had shed for the exile.
And while they sat themselves down to rest them here for a little,
Thus spoke the amorous youth, as he grasped the hand of the maiden:
"Suffer thy heart to make answer, and follow it freely in all things."
Yet naught further he ventured to say although so propitious
Seemed the hour: he feared he should only haste on a refusal.
Ah, and he felt besides the ring on her finger, sad token!
Therefore they sat there, silent and still, beside one another.

First was the maiden to speak: "How sweet is this glorious moonlight!"
Said she at length: "It is as the light of the day in its brightness.
There in the city I plainly can see the houses and courtyards,
And in the gable—methinks I can number its panes-is a window."
"What thou seest," the modest youth thereupon made her answer,—
"What thou seest is our dwelling, to which I am leading thee downward,
And that window yonder belongs to my room in the attic,
Which will be thine perhaps, for various changes are making.
All these fields, too, are ours; they are ripe for the harvest to-morrow.
Here in the shade we will rest, and partake of our noontide refreshment.
But it is time we began our descent through the vineyard and garden;
For dost thou mark how yon threatening storm-cloud comes nearer and nearer,
Charged with lightning, and ready our fair full moon to extinguish?"
So they arose from their seats, and over the cornfields descended,
Through the luxuriant grain, enjoying the brightness of evening,
Until they came to the vineyard, and so entered into its shadow.
Then he guided her down o'er the numerous blocks that were lying,
Rough and unhewn on the pathway, and served as the steps of the alley.
Slowly the maiden descended, and leaning her hands on his shoulder,
While with uncertain beams, the moon through the leaves overlooked them,
Ere she was veiled by the cloud, and so left the couple in darkness.
Carefully Hermann's strength supported the maid that hung o'er him;
But, not knowing the path and the rough-hewn steps that led down it,
Missed she her footing, her ankle turned, and she surely had fallen,
Had not the dexterous youth his arm outstretched in an instant,
And his beloved upheld. She gently sank on his shoulder;
Breast was pressed against breast, and cheek against cheek. Thus he stood there
Fixed as a marble statue, the force of will keeping him steadfast,
Drew her not to him more closely, but braced himself under her pressure.
Thus he the glorious burden felt, the warmth of her bosom,
And the perfume of her breath, that over his lips was exhaling;
Bore with the heart of a man the majestic form of the woman.
But she with playfulness said, concealing the pain that she suffered:
"That is a sign of misfortune, so timorous persons would tell us,

When on approaching a house we stumble not far from the threshold;
And for myself, I confess, I could wish for a happier omen.
Let us here linger awhile that thy parents may not have to blame thee,
Seeing a limping maid, and thou seem an incompetent landlord."

URANIA
PROSPECT
Muses, O ye who the course of true love so willingly favor,
Ye who thus far on his way the excellent youth have conducted,
Even before the betrothal have pressed to his bosom the maiden;
Further your aid vouchsafe this charming pair in uniting,
Straightway dispersing the clouds which over their happiness lower!
Yet first of all declare what is passing meanwhile at the Lion.
Now for the third time again the mother impatient had entered
Where were assembled the men, whom anxious but now she had quitted;
Spoke of the gathering storm, and the moonlight's rapid obscuring;
Then of her son's late tarrying abroad and the dangers of nightfall;
Sharply upbraided her friends that without having speech of the maiden,
And without urging his suit, they had parted from Hermann so early.
"Make it not worse than it is," the father replied with displeasure.
"For, as thou seest, we tarry ourselves and are waiting the issue."
Calmly, however, from where he was sitting the neighbor made answer:
"Never in hours of disquiet like this do I fail to be grateful
Unto my late, blessed father, who every root of impatience
Tore from my heart when a child, and left no fibre remaining;
So that I learned on the instant to wait as do none of your sages."
"Tell us," the pastor returned, "what legerdemain he made use of."
"That will I gladly relate, for all may draw from it a lesson;"
So made the neighbor reply. "When a boy I once stood of a Sunday
Full of impatience, and looking with eagerness out for the carriage
Which was to carry us forth to the spring that lies under the lindens.
Still the coach came not. I ran, like a weasel, now hither, now thither,
Up stairs and down, and forward and back, 'twixt the door and the window;
Even my fingers itched to be moving; I scratched on the tables,
Went about pounding and stamping, and hardly could keep me from weeping.
All was observed by the calm-tempered man; but at last when my folly
Came to be carried too far, by the arm he quietly took me,

Led me away to the window, and spoke in this serious language:
'Seest thou yonder the carpenter's shop that is closed for the Sunday?
He will re-open to-morrow, when plane and saw will be started,
And will keep on through the hours of labor from morning till evening.
But consider you this,—a day will be presently coming
When that man shall himself be astir and all of his workmen,
Making a coffin for thee to be quickly and skilfully finished.
Then that house of boards they will busily bring over hither,
Which must at last receive alike the impatient and patient,
And which is destined soon with close-pressing roof to be covered.'
Straightway I saw the whole thing in my mind as if it were doing;
Saw the boards fitting together, and saw the black color preparing,
Sat me down patiently then, and in quiet awaited the carriage.
Now when others I see, in seasons of anxious expectance,
Running distracted about, I cannot but think of the coffin."
Smiling, the pastor replied: "The affecting picture of death stands
Not as a dread to the wise, and not as an end to the pious.
Those it presses again into life, and teaches to use it;
These by affliction it strengthens in hope to future salvation.
Death becomes life unto both. Thy father was greatly mistaken
When to a sensitive boy he death in death thus depicted.
Let us the value of nobly ripe age, point out to the young man,
And to the aged the youth, that in the eternal progression
Both may rejoice, and life may in life thus find its completion."
But the door was now opened, and showed the majestical couple.
Filled with amaze were the friends, and amazed the affectionate parents,
Seeing the form of the maid so well matched with that of her lover.
Yea, the door seemed too low to allow the tall figures to enter,
As they together now appeared coming over the threshold.
Hermann, with hurried words, presented her thus to his parents:
"Here is a maiden," he said; "such a one as ye wish in the household.
Kindly receive her, dear father: she merits it well; and thou, mother,
Question her straightway on all that belongs to a housekeeper's duty,
That ye may see how well she deserves to ye both to be nearer."

Quickly he then drew aside the excellent clergyman, saying:
"Help me, O worthy sir, and speedily out of this trouble;
Loosen, I pray thee, this knot, at whose untying I tremble.
Know that 'tis not as a lover that I have brought hither the maiden;
But she believes that as servant she comes to the house, and I tremble
Lest in displeasure she fly as soon as there's mention of marriage.
But be it straightway decided; for she no longer in error
Thus shall be left, and I this suspense no longer can suffer.
Hasten and show us in this a proof of the wisdom we honor."
Towards the company then the clergyman instantly turned him;
But already, alas! had the soul of the maiden been troubled,
Hearing the father's speech; for he, in his sociable fashion,
Had in these playful words, with the kindest intention addressed her:
"Ay, this is well, my child! with delight I perceive that my Hermann
Has the good taste of his father, who often showed his in his young days,
Leading out always the fairest to dance, and bringing the fairest
Finally home as his wife; our dear little mother here that was.
For by the bride that a man shall elect we can judge what himself is,
Tell what the spirit is in him, and whether he feel his own value.
Nor didst thou need for thyself, I'll engage, much time for decision;
For, in good sooth, methinks, he's no difficult person to follow."
Hermann had heard but in part; his limbs were inwardly trembling,
And of a sudden a stillness had fallen on all of the circle.
But by these words of derision, for such she could not but deem them,
Wounded, and stung to the depths of her soul, the excellent maiden,
Stood, while the fugitive blood o'er her cheeks and e'en to her bosom,
Poured its flush. But she governed herself, and her courage collecting,
Answered the old man thus, her pain not wholly concealing:
"Truly for such a reception thy son had in no wise prepared me,
When he the ways of his father described, the excellent burgher.
Thou art a man of culture, I know, before whom I am standing;
Dealest with every one wisely, according as suits his position;
But thou hast scanty compassion, it seems, on one such as I am,
Who, a poor girl, am now crossing thy threshold with purpose to serve thee;

Else, with such bitter derision, thou wouldst not have made me remember
How far removed my fortune from that of thyself and thy son is.
True, I come poor to thy house, and bring with me naught but my bundle
Here where is every abundance to gladden the prosperous inmates.
Yet I know well myself; I feel the relations between us,
Say, is it noble, with so much of mockery straightway to greet me,
That I am sent from the house while my foot is scarce yet on the threshold?"
Anxiously Hermann turned and signed to his ally the pastor
That he should rush to the rescue and straightway dispel the delusion.
Then stepped the wise man hastily forward and looked on the maiden's
Tearful eyes, her silent pain and repressed indignation,
And in his heart was impelled not at once to clear up the confusion,
Rather to put to the test the girl's disquieted spirit.
Therefore he unto her said in language intended to try her:
"Surely, thou foreign-born maiden, thou didst not maturely consider,
When thou too rashly decidedst to enter the service of strangers,
All that is meant by the placing thyself 'neath the rule of a master;
For by our hand to a bargain the fate of the year is determined,
And but a single 'yea' compels to much patient endurance.
Not the worst part of the service the wearisome steps to be taken,
Neither the bitter sweat of a labor that presses unceasing;
Since the industrious freeman must toil as well as the servant.
But 'tis to bear with the master's caprice when he censures unjustly,
Or when, at variance with self, he orders now this, now the other;
Bear with the petulance, too, of the mistress, easily angered,
And with the rude, overbearing ways of unmannerly children.
All this is hard to endure, and yet to go on with thy duties
Quickly, without delay, nor thyself grow sullen and stubborn.
Yet thou appearest ill fitted for this, since already so deeply
Stung by the father's jests: whereas there is nothing more common
Than for a girl to be teased on account of a youth she may fancy."
Thus he spoke. The maiden had felt the full force of his language,
And she restrained her no more; but with passionate outburst her feelings
Made themselves way; a sob broke forth from her now heaving bosom,
And, while the scalding tears poured down, she straightway made answer:

"Ah, that rational man who thinks to advise us in sorrow,
Knows not how little of power his cold words have in relieving
Ever a heart from that woe which a sovereign fate has inflicted.
Ye are prosperous and glad; how then should a pleasantry wound you?
Yet but the lightest touch is a source of pain to the sick man.
Nay, concealment itself, if successful, had profited nothing.
Better show now what had later increased to a bitterer anguish,
And to an inward consuming despair might perhaps have reduced me.
Let me go back! for here in this house I can tarry no longer.
I will away, and wander in search of my hapless companions,
Whom I forsook in their need; for myself alone choosing the better.
This is my firm resolve, and I therefore may make a confession
Which might for years perhaps have else lain hid in my bosom.
Deeply indeed was I hurt by the father's words of derision;
Not that I'm sensitive, proud beyond what is fitting a servant;
But that my heart in truth had felt itself stirred with affection
Towards the youth who to-day had appeared to my eyes as a savior.
When he first left me there on the road, he still remained present,
Haunting my every thought; I fancied the fortunate maiden
Whom as a bride, perhaps, his heart had already elected.
When at the fountain I met him again, the sight of him wakened
Pleasure as great as if there had met me an angel from heaven;
And with what gladness I followed, when asked to come as his servant.
True, that I flattered myself in my heart,—I will not deny it,—
While we were hitherward coming, I might peradventure deserve him,
Should I become at last the important stay of the household.
Now I, alas! for the first time see what risk I was running,
When I would make my home so near to the secretly loved one;
Now for the first time feel how far removed a poor maiden
Is from an opulent youth, no matter how great her deserving.
All this I now confess, that my heart ye may not misinterpret,
In that 'twas hurt by a chance to which I owe my awaking.
Hiding my secret desires, this dread had been ever before me,
That at some early day he would bring him a bride to his dwelling;
And ah, how could I then my inward anguish have suffered!
Happily I have been warned, and happily now has my bosom
Been of its secret relieved, while yet there is cure for the evil.

But no more; I have spoken; and now shall nothing detain me
Longer here in a house where I stay but in shame and confusion,
Freely confessing my love and that foolish hope that I cherished.
Not the night which abroad is covered with lowering storm clouds;
Not the roll of the thunder—I hear its peal—shall deter me;
Not the pelt of the rain which without is beating in fury;
Neither the blustering tempest; for all these things have I suffered
During our sorrowful flight, and while the near foe was pursuing.
Now I again go forth, as I have so long been accustomed,
Carried away by the whirl of the times, and from every thing parted.
Fare ye well! I tarry no longer; all now is over."
Thus she spoke and back to the door she hastily turned her,
Still bearing under her arm, as she with her had brought it, her bundle.
But with both of her arms the mother seized hold of the maiden,
Clasping her round the waist, and exclaiming, amazed and bewildered:
"Tell me, what means all this? and these idle tears, say, what mean they?
I will not let thee depart: thou art the betrothed of my Hermann."
But still the father stood, observing the scene with displeasure,
Looked on the weeping girl, and said in a tone of vexation:
"This then must be the return that I get for all my indulgence,
That at the close of the day this most irksome of all things should happen!
For there is naught I can tolerate less than womanish weeping,
Violent outcries, which only involve in disorder and passion,
What with a little of sense had been more smoothly adjusted.
Settle the thing for yourselves: I'm going to bed; I've no patience
Longer to be a spectator of these your marvellous doings."
Quickly he turned as he spoke, and hastened to go to the chamber
Where he was wonted to rest, and his marriage bed was kept standing,
But he was held by his son, who said in a tone of entreaty:
"Father, hasten not from us, and be thou not wroth with the maiden.
I, only I, am to blame as the cause of all this confusion,
Which by his dissimulation our friend unexpectedly heightened.
Speak, O worthy sir; for to thee my cause I intrusted.
Heap not up sorrow and anger, but rather let all this be ended;
For I could hold thee never again in such high estimation,

If thou shouldst show but delight in pain, not superior wisdom."
Thereupon answered and said the excellent clergyman, smiling:
"Tell me, what other device could have drawn this charming confession
Out of the good maiden's lips, and thus have revealed her affection?
Has not thy trouble been straightway transformed into gladness and rapture?
Therefore speak up for thyself; what need of the tongue of another?"
Thereupon Hermann came forward, and spoke in these words of affection:
"Do not repent of thy tears, nor repent of these passing distresses;
For they complete my joy, and—may I not hope it-thine also?
Not to engage the stranger, the excellent maid, as a servant,
Unto the fountain I came; but to sue for thy love I came thither.
Only, alas! my timorous look could thy heart's inclination
Nowise perceive; I read in thine eyes of nothing but kindness,
As from the fountain's tranquil mirror thou gavest me greeting.
Might I but bring thee home, the half of my joy was accomplished.
But thou completest it unto me now; oh, blest be thou for it!"
Then with a deep emotion the maiden gazed on the stripling;
Neither forbade she embrace and kiss, the summit of rapture,
When to a loving pair they come as the longed-for assurance,
Pledge of a lifetime of bliss, that appears to them now never-ending.
Unto the others, meanwhile, the pastor had made explanation.
But with feeling and grace the maid now advanced to the father,
Bent her before him, and kissing the hand he would fain have withholden,
Said: "Thou wilt surely be just and forgive one so startled as I was,
First for my tears of distress, and now for the tears of my gladness.
That emotion forgive me, and oh! forgive me this also.
For I can scarce comprehend the happiness newly vouchsafed me.
Yes, let that first vexation of which I, bewildered, was guilty
Be too the last. Whatever the maid of affectionate service
Faithfully promised, shall be to thee now performed by the daughter."
Straightway then, concealing his tears, the father embraced her,
Cordially, too, the mother came forward and kissed her with fervor,
Pressing her hands in her own: the weeping women were silent.

Thereupon quickly he seized, the good and intelligent pastor,
First the father's hand, and the wedding-ring drew from his finger,—
Not so easily either: the finger was plump and detained it,—
Next took the mother's ring also, and with them betrothed he the children,
Saying: "These golden circlets once more their office performing
Firmly a tie shall unite, which in all things shall equal the old one,
Deeply is this young man imbued with love of the maiden,
And, as the maiden confesses, her heart is gone out to him also.
Here do I therefore betroth you and bless for the years that are coming,
With the consent of the parents, and having this friend as a witness."
Then the neighbor saluted at once, and expressed his good wishes;
But when the clergyman now the golden circlet was drawing
Over the maiden's hand, he observed with amazement the other,
Which had already by Hermann been anxiously marked at the fountain.
And with a kindly raillery thus thereupon he addressed her:
"So, then thy second betrothal is this? let us hope the first bridegroom
May not appear at the altar, and so prohibit the marriage."
But she, answering, said: "Oh, let me to this recollection
Yet one moment devote; for so much is due the good giver,
Him who bestowed it at parting, and never came back to his kindred.
All that should come he foresaw, when in haste the passion for freedom,
When a desire in the newly changed order of things to be working,
Urged him onward to Paris, where chains and death he encountered.
'Fare thee well,' were his words; 'I go, for all is in motion
Now for a time on the earth, and every thing seems to be parting.
E'en in the firmest states fundamental laws are dissolving;
Property falls away from the hand of the ancient possessor;
Friend is parted from friend; and so parts lover from lover.
Here I leave thee, and where I shall find thee again, or if ever,
Who can tell? Perhaps these words are our last ones together.
Man's but a stranger here on the earth, we are told and with reason;
And we are each of us now become more of strangers than ever.
Ours no more is the soil, and our treasures are all of them changing:
Silver and gold are melting away from their time-honored patterns.
All is in motion as though the already-shaped world into chaos

Meant to resolve itself backward into night, and to shape itself over.
Mine thou wilt keep thine heart, and should we be ever united
Over the ruins of earth, it will be as newly made creatures,
Beings transformed and free, no longer dependent on fortune;
For can aught fetter the man who has lived through days such as these are!
But if it is not to be, that, these dangers happily over,
Ever again we be granted the bliss of mutual embraces,
Oh, then before thy thoughts so keep my hovering image
That with unshaken mind thou be ready for good or for evil!
Should new ties allure thee again, and a new habitation,
Enter with gratitude into the joys that fate shall prepare thee;
Love those purely who love thee; be grateful to them who show kindness.
But thine uncertain foot should yet be planted but lightly,
For there is lurking the twofold pain of a new separation.
Blessings attend thy life; but value existence no higher
Than thine other possessions, and all possessions are cheating!'
Thus spoke the noble youth, and never again I beheld him.
Meanwhile I lost my all, and a thousand times thought of his warning.
Here, too, I think of his words, when love is sweetly preparing
Happiness for me anew, and glorious hopes are reviving,
Oh forgive me, excellent friend, that e'en while I hold thee
Close to my side I tremble! So unto the late-landed sailor
Seem the most solid foundations of firmest earth to be rocking."
Thus she spoke, and placed the two rings on her finger together.
But her lover replied with a noble and manly emotion:
"So much the firmer then, amid these universal convulsions,
Be, Dorothea, our union! We two will hold fast and continue,
Firmly maintaining ourselves, and the right to our ample possessions.
For that man, who, when times are uncertain, is faltering in spirit,
Only increases the evil, and further and further transmits it;
While he refashions the world, who keeps himself steadfastly minded.
Poorly becomes it the German to give to these fearful excitements
Aught of continuance, or to be this way and that way inclining.
This is our own! let that be our word, and let us maintain it!
For to those resolute peoples respect will be ever accorded,
Who for God and the laws, for parents, women and children,

Fought and died, as together they stood with their front to the foeman.
Thou art mine own; and now what is mine, is mine more than ever.
Not with anxiety will I preserve it, and trembling enjoyment;
Rather with courage and strength. To-day should the enemy threaten,
Or in the future, equip me thyself and hand me my weapons.
Let me but know that under thy care are my house and dear parents,
Oh! I can then with assurance expose my breast to the foeman.
And were but every man minded like me, there would be an upspring
Might against might, and peace should revisit us all with its gladness."

CHAPTER I.
The play was late in breaking up: old Barbara went more than once to the window, and
listened for the sound of carriages. She was waiting for Mariana, her pretty mistress,
who had that night, in the afterpiece, been acting the part of a young officer, to the no
small delight of the public. Barbara's impatience was greater than it used to be, when
she had nothing but a frugal supper to present: on this occasion Mariana was to be
surprised with a packet, which Norberg, a young and wealthy merchant, had sent by
the post, to show that in absence he still thought of his love.
As an old servant, as confidant, counsellor, manager, and housekeeper, Barbara
assumed the privilege of opening seals; and this evening she had the less been able to
restrain her curiosity, as the favor of the open-handed gallant was more a matter of
anxiety with herself than with her mistress. On breaking up the packet, she had found,
with unfeigned satisfaction, that it held a piece of fine muslin and some ribbons of the
newest fashion, for Mariana; with a quantity of calico, two or three neckerchiefs, and a
moderate rouleau of money, for herself. Her esteem for the absent Norberg was of
course unbounded: she meditated only how she might best present him to the mind of
Mariana, best bring to her recollection what she owed him, and what he had a right to
expect from her fidelity and thankfulness.
The muslin, with the ribbons half unrolled, to set it off by their colors, lay like a
Christmas present on the small table; the position of the lights increased the glitter of
the gilt; all was in order, when the old woman heard Mariana's step on the stairs, and
hastened to meet her. But what was her disappointment, when the little female
officer, without deigning to regard her caresses, rushed past her with unusual speed
and agitation, threw her hat and sword upon the table, and walked hastily up and
down, bestowing not a look on the lights, or any portion of the apparatus.
"What ails thee, my darling?" exclaimed the astonished Barbara. "For Heaven's sake,
what is the matter? Look here, my pretty child! See what a present! And who could
have sent it but thy kindest of friends? Norberg has given thee the muslin to make a
night-gown of; he will soon be here himself; he seems to be fonder and more generous
than ever."

Barbara went to the table, that she might exhibit the memorials with which Norberg
had likewise honored her, when Mariana, turning away from the presents, exclaimed
with vehemence, "Off! off! Not a word of all this to-night. I have yielded to thee; thou
hast willed it; be it so! When Norberg comes, I am his, am thine, am any one's; make of
me what thou pleasest; but till then I will be my own; and, if thou hadst a thousand
tongues, thou shouldst never talk me from my purpose. All, all that is my own will I
give up to him who loves me, whom I love. No sour faces! I will abandon myself to this
affection, as if it were to last forever."
The old damsel had abundance of objections and serious considerations to allege: in
the progress of the dialogue, she was growing bitter and keen, when Mariana sprang
at her, and seized her by the breast. The old damsel laughed aloud. "I must have a
care," she cried, "that you don't get into pantaloons again, if I mean to be sure of my
life. Come, doff you! The girl will beg my pardon for the foolish things the boy is doing
to me. Off with the frock. Off with them all. The dress beseems you not; it is dangerous
for you, I observe; the epaulets make you too bold."
Thus speaking, she laid hands upon her mistress: Mariana pushed her off, exclaiming,
"Not so fast! I expect a visit to-night."
"Visit!" rejoined Barbara: "you surely do not look for Meister, the young, soft-hearted,
callow merchant's son?"
"Just for him," replied Mariana.
"Generosity appears to be growing your ruling passion," said the old woman with a
grin: "you connect yourself with minors and moneyless people, as if they were the
chosen of the earth. Doubtless it is charming to be worshipped as a benefactress."
"Jeer as thou pleasest. I love him! I love him! With what rapture do I now, for the first
time, speak the word! This is the passion I have mimicked so often, when I knew not
what it meant. Yes! I will throw myself about his neck: I will clasp him as if I could hold
him forever. I will show him all my love, will enjoy all his in its whole extent."
"Moderate yourself," said the old dame coolly, "moderate yourself. A single word will
interrupt your rapture: Norberg is coming! Coming in a fortnight! Here is the letter that
arrived with the packet."

"And, though the morrow were to rob me of my friend, I would conceal it from myself
and him. A fortnight! An age! Within a fortnight, what may not happen, what may not
alter?"
Here Wilhelm entered. We need not say how fast she flew to meet him, with what
rapture he clasped the red uniform, and pressed the beautiful wearer of it to his
bosom. It is not for us to describe the blessedness of two lovers. Old Barbara went
grumbling away: we shall retire with her, and leave the happy two alone.

CHAPTER II.
When Wilhelm saluted his mother next morning, she informed him that his father was
very greatly discontented with him, and meant to forbid him these daily visits to the
playhouse. "Though I myself often go with pleasure to the theatre," she continued, "I
could almost detest it entirely, when I think that our fireside-peace is broken by your
excessive passion for that amusement. Your father is ever repeating, 'What is the use
of it? How can any one waste his time so?'"
"He has told me this already," said Wilhelm, "and perhaps I answered him too hastily;
but, for Heaven's sake, mother, is nothing, then, of use but what immediately puts
money in our purse? but what procures us some property that we can lay our hands
on? Had we not, for instance, room enough in the old house? and was it indispensable
to build a new one? Does not my father every year expend a large part of his profit in
ornamenting his chambers? Are these silk carpets, this English furniture, likewise of no
use? Might we not content ourselves with worse? For my own part, I confess, these
striped walls, these hundred times repeated flowers and knots and baskets and
figures, produce a really disagreeable effect upon me. At best, they but remind me of
the front curtain of our theatre. But what a different thing it is to sit and look at that!
There, if you must wait for a while, you are always sure that it will rise at last, and
disclose to you a thousand curious objects to entertain, to instruct, and to exalt you."
"But you go to excess with it," said the mother. "Your father wishes to be entertained
in the evenings as well as you: besides, he thinks it diverts your attention; and, when
he grows ill-humored on the subject, it is I that must bear the blame. How often have I
been upbraided with that miserable puppet-show, which I was unlucky enough to
provide for you at Christmas, twelve years ago! It was the first thing that put these
plays into your head."
"Oh, do not blame the poor puppets! do not repent of your love and motherly care! It
was the only happy hour I had enjoyed in the new empty house. I never can forget that
hour; I see it still before me; I recollect how surprised I was, when, after we had got
our customary presents, you made us seat ourselves before the door that leads to the
other room. The door opened, but not, as formerly, to let us pass and repass: the
entrance was occupied by an unexpected show. Within it rose a porch, concealed by a
mysterious curtain. All of us were standing at a distance: our eagerness to see what
glittering or jingling article lay hid behind the half-transparent veil was mounting

higher and higher, when you bade us each sit down upon his stool, and wait with
patience.
"At length all of us were seated and silent: a whistle gave the signal; the curtain rolled
aloft, and showed us the interior of the temple, painted in deep-red colors. The highpriest Samuel appeared with Jonathan, and their strange alternating voices seemed to
me the most striking thing on earth. Shortly after entered Saul, overwhelmed with
confusion at the impertinence of that heavy-limbed warrior, who had defied him and
all his people. But how glad was I when the little dapper son of Jesse, with his crook
and shepherd's pouch and sling, came hopping forth, and said, 'Dread king and
sovereign lord, let no one's heart sink down because of this: if your Majesty will grant
me leave, I will go out to battle with this blustering giant!' Here ended the first act,
leaving the spectators more curious than ever to see what further would happen; each
praying that the music might soon be done. At last the curtain rose again. David
devoted the flesh of the monster to the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field: the
Philistine scorned and bullied him, stamped mightily with both his feet, and at length
fell like a mass of clay, affording a splendid termination to the piece. And then the
virgins sang, 'Saul hath slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands!' The giant's
head was borne before his little victor, who received the king's beautiful daughter to
wife. Yet withal, I remember, I was vexed at the dwarfish stature of this lucky prince;
for the great Goliath and the small David had both been formed, according to the
common notion, with a due regard to their figures and proportions. I pray you,
mother, tell me what has now become of those puppets? I promised to show them to
a friend, whom I was lately entertaining with a history of all this child's work."
"I can easily conceive," said the mother, "how these things should stick so firmly in
your mind: I well remember what an interest you took in them,—how you stole the
little book from me, and learned the whole piece by heart. I first noticed it one evening
when you had made a Goliath and a David of wax: you set them both to declaim
against each other, and at length gave a deadly stab to the giant, fixing his shapeless
head, stuck upon a large pin with a wax handle, in little David's hand. I then felt such a
motherly contentment at your fine recitation and good memory, that I resolved to give
you up the whole wooden troop to your own disposal. I did not then foresee that it
would cause me so many heavy hours."
"Do not repent of it," said Wilhelm: "this little sport has often made us happy." So
saying, he got the keys, made haste to find the puppets, and, for a moment, was

transported back into those times when they almost seemed to him alive, when he felt
as if he himself could give them life by the cunning of his voice and the movements of
his hands. He took them to his room, and locked them up with care.

CHAPTER III.
If the first love is indeed, as I hear it everywhere maintained to be, the most delicious
feeling which the heart of man, before it or after, can experience, then our hero must
be reckoned doubly happy, as permitted to enjoy the pleasure of this chosen period in
all its fulness. Few men are so peculiarly favored: by far the greater part are led by the
feelings of their youth into nothing but a school of hardship, where, after a stinted and
checkered season of enjoyment, they are at length constrained to renounce their
dearest wishes, and to learn forever to dispense with what once hovered before them
as the highest happiness of existence.
Wilhelm's passion for that charming girl now soared aloft on the wings of imagination.
After a short acquaintance, he had gained her affections: he found himself in
possession of a being, whom, with all his heart, he not only loved, but honored; for she
had first appeared before him in the flattering light of theatric pomp, and his passion
for the stage combined itself with his earliest love for woman. His youth allowed him
to enjoy rich pleasures, which the activity of his fancy exalted and maintained. The
situation of his mistress, too, gave a turn to her conduct which greatly enlivened his
emotions. The fear lest her lover might, before the time, detect the real state in which
she stood, diffused over all her conduct an interesting tinge of anxiety and
bashfulness; her attachment to the youth was deep; her very inquietude appeared but
to augment her tenderness; she was the loveliest of creatures while beside him.
When the first tumult of joy had passed, and our friend began to look back upon his
life and its concerns, every thing appeared new to him: his duties seemed holier, his
inclinations keener, his knowledge clearer, his talents stronger, his purposes more
decided. Accordingly, he soon fell upon a plan to avoid the reproaches of his father, to
still the cares of his mother, and, at the same time, to enjoy Mariana's love without
disturbance. Through the day he punctually transacted his business, commonly forbore
attending the theatre, strove to be entertaining at table in the evening; and, when all
were asleep, he glided softly out into the garden, and hastened, wrapped up in his
mantle, with all the feelings of Leander in his bosom, to meet his mistress without
delay.
"What is this you bring?" inquired Mariana, as he entered one evening, with a bundle,
which Barbara, in hopes it might turn out to be some valuable present, fixed her eyes
upon with great attention. "You will never guess," said Wilhelm.

Great was the surprise of Mariana, great the scorn of Barbara, when the napkin, being
loosened, gave to view a perplexed multitude of span-long puppets. Mariana laughed
aloud, as Wilhelm set himself to disentangle the confusion of the wires, and show her
each figure by itself. Barbara glided sulkily out of the room.
A very little thing will entertain two lovers; and accordingly our friends, this evening,
were as happy as they wished to be. The little troop was mustered: each figure was
minutely examined, and laughed at, in its turn. King Saul, with his golden crown and his
black velvet robe, Mariana did not like: he looked, she said, too stiff and pedantic. She
was far better pleased with Jonathan, his sleek chin, his turban, his cloak of red and
yellow. She soon got the art of turning him deftly on his wire: she made him bow, and
repeat declarations of love. On the other hand, she refused to give the least attention
to the prophet Samuel; though Wilhelm commended the pontifical breastplate, and
told her that the taffeta of the cassock had been taken from a gown of his own
grandmother's. David she thought too small; Goliath was too big; she held by
Jonathan. She grew to manage him so featly, and at last to extend her caresses from
the puppet to its owner, that, on this occasion, as on others, a silly sport became the
introduction to happy hours.
Their soft, sweet dreams were broken in upon by a noise which arose on the street.
Mariana called for the old dame, who, as usual, was occupied in furbishing the
changeful materials of the playhouse wardrobe for the service of the play next to be
acted. Barbara said the disturbance arose from a set of jolly companions, who were
just then sallying out of the Italian tavern hard by, where they had been busy
discussing fresh oysters, a cargo of which had just arrived, and by no means sparing
their champagne.
"Pity," Mariana said, "that we did not think of it in time: we might have had some
entertainment to ourselves."
"It is not yet too late," said Wilhelm, giving Barbara a louis-d'or: "get us what we want,
then come and take a share with us."
The old dame made speedy work: erelong a trimly covered table, with a neat collation,
stood before the lovers. They made Barbara sit with them: they ate and drank, and
enjoyed themselves.

On such occasions, there is never want of enough to say. Mariana soon took up little
Jonathan again, and the old dame turned the conversation upon Wilhelm's favorite
topic. "You were once telling us," she said, "about the first exhibition of a puppet-show
on Christmas Eve: I remember you were interrupted just as the ballet was going to
begin. We have now the pleasure of a personal acquaintance with the honorable
company by whom those wonderful effects were brought about."
"Oh, yes!" cried Mariana: "do tell us how it all went on, and how you felt then."
"It is a fine emotion, Mariana," said the youth, "when we bethink ourselves of old
times, and old, harmless errors, especially if this is at a period when we have happily
gained some elevation, from which we can look around us, and survey the path we
have left behind. It is so pleasant to think, with composure and satisfaction, of many
obstacles, which often with painful feelings we may have regarded as invincible,—
pleasant to compare what we now are with what we then were struggling to become.
But I am happy above others in this matter, that I speak to you about the past, at a
moment when I can also look forth into the blooming country, which we are yet to
wander through together, hand in hand."
"But how was it with the ballet?" said Barbara. "I fear it did not quite go off as it should
have done."
"I assure you," said Wilhelm, "it went off quite well. And certainly the strange
caperings of these Moors and Mooresses, these shepherds and shepherdesses, these
dwarfs and dwarfesses, will never altogether leave my recollection while I live. When
the curtain dropped, and the door closed, our little party skipped away, frolicking as if
they had been tipsy, to their beds. For myself, however, I remember that I could not go
to sleep: still wanting to have something told me on the subject, I continued putting
questions to every one, and would hardly let the maid away who had brought me up to
bed.
"Next morning, alas! the magic apparatus had altogether vanished; the mysterious veil
was carried off; the door permitted us again to go and come through it without
obstruction; the manifold adventures of the evening had passed away, and left no
trace behind. My brothers and sisters were running up and down with their playthings;
I alone kept gliding to and fro: it seemed to me impossible that two bare door-posts
could be all that now remained, where the night before so much enchantment had

been displayed. Alas! the man that seeks a lost love can hardly be unhappier than I
then thought myself."
A rapturous look, which he cast on Mariana, convinced her that he was not afraid of
such ever being his case.

CHAPTER IV.
"My sole wish now," continued Wilhelm, "was to witness a second exhibition of the
play. For this purpose I had recourse, by constant entreaties, to my mother; and she
attempted in a favorable hour to persuade my father. Her labor, however, was in vain.
My father's principle was, that none but enjoyments of rare occurrence were
adequately prized; that neither young nor old could set a proper value on pleasures
which they tasted every day.
"We might have waited long, perhaps till Christmas returned, had not the contriver
and secret director of the spectacle himself felt a pleasure in repeating the display of
it, partly incited, I suppose, by the wish to produce a brand-new harlequin expressly
prepared for the afterpiece.
"A young officer of the artillery, a person of great gifts in all sorts of mechanical
contrivance, had served my father in many essential particulars during the building of
the house; for which, having been handsomely rewarded, he felt desirous of
expressing his thankfulness to the family of his patron, and so made us young ones a
present of this complete theatre, which, in hours of leisure, he had already carved and
painted, and strung together. It was this young man, who, with the help of a servant,
had himself managed the puppets, disguising his voice to pronounce their various
speeches. He had no great difficulty in persuading my father, who granted, out of
complaisance to a friend, what he had denied from conviction to his children. In short,
our theatre was again set up, some little ones of the neighborhood were invited, and
the play was again represented.
"If I had formerly experienced the delights of surprise and astonishment, I enjoyed on
this second occasion the pleasure of examining and scrutinizing. How all this happened
was my present concern. That the puppets themselves did not speak, I had already
decided; that of themselves they did not move, I also conjectured; but, then, how
came it all to be so pretty, and to look just as if they both spoke and moved of
themselves? and where were the lights, and the people that managed the deception?
These enigmas perplexed me the more, as I wished to be at the same time among the
enchanters and the enchanted, at the same time to have a secret hand in the play, and
to enjoy, as a looker-on, the pleasure of illusion.
"The play being finished, preparations were making for the farce: the spectators had
risen, and were all busy talking together. I squeezed myself closer to the door, and

heard, by the rattling within, that the people were packing up some articles. I lifted the
lowest screen, and poked in my head between the posts. As our mother noticed it, she
drew me back: but I had seen well enough that here friends and foes, Saul and Goliath,
and whatever else their names might be, were lying quietly down together in a drawer;
and thus my half-contented curiosity received a fresh excitement. To my great
surprise, moreover, I had noticed the lieutenant very diligently occupied in the interior
of the shrine. Henceforth, Jack-pudding, however he might clatter with his heels, could
not any longer entertain me. I sank into deep meditation: my discovery made me both
more satisfied, and less so, than before. After a little, it first struck me that I yet
comprehended nothing: and here I was right; for the connection of the parts with each
other was entirely unknown to me, and every thing depends on that."

CHAPTER V.
"In well adjusted and regulated houses," continued Wilhelm, "children have a feeling
not unlike what I conceive rats and mice to have: they keep a sharp eye on all crevices
and holes, where they may come at any forbidden dainty; they enjoy it also with a
fearful, stolen satisfaction, which forms no small part of the happiness of childhood.
"More than any other of the young ones, I was in the habit of looking out attentively,
to see if I could notice any cupboard left open, or key standing in its lock. The more
reverence I bore in my heart for those closed doors, on the outside of which I had to
pass by for weeks and months, catching only a furtive glance when our mother now
and then opened the consecrated place to take something from it, the quicker was I to
make use of any opportunities which the forgetfulness of our housekeepers at times
afforded me.
"Among all the doors, that of the storeroom was, of course, the one I watched most
narrowly. Few of the joyful anticipations in life can equal the feeling which I used to
have when my mother happened to call me, that I might help her to carry out
something, whereupon I might pick up a few dried plums, either with her kind
permission, or by help of my own dexterity. The accumulated treasures of this
chamber took hold of my imagination by their magnitude: the very fragrance exhaled
by so multifarious a collection of sweet-smelling spices produced such a craving effect
on me, that I never failed, when passing near, to linger for a little, and regale myself at
least on the unbolted atmosphere. At length, one Sunday morning, my mother, being
hurried by the ringing of the church-bells, forgot to take this precious key with her on
shutting the door, and went away, leaving all the house in a deep Sabbath stillness. No
sooner had I marked this oversight than, gliding softly once or twice to and from the
place, I at last approached very gingerly, opened the door, and felt myself, after a
single step, in immediate contact with these manifold and long-wished-for means of
happiness. I glanced over glasses, chests, and bags, and drawers and boxes, with a
quick and doubtful eye, considering what I ought to choose and take; turned finally to
my dear withered plums, provided myself also with a few dried apples, and completed
the forage with an orange-chip. I was quietly retreating with my plunder, when some
little chests, lying piled over one another, caught my attention,—the more so as
I noticed a wire, with hooks at the end of it, sticking through the joint of the lid in one
of them. Full of eager hopes, I opened this singular package; and judge of my
emotions, when I found my glad world of heroes all sleeping safe within! I meant to

pick out the topmost, and, having examined them, to pull up those below; but in this
attempt the wires got very soon entangled: and I fell into a fright and flutter, more
particularly as the cook just then began making some stir in the kitchen, which was
close by; so that I had nothing for it but to squeeze the whole together the best way I
could, and to shut the chest, having stolen from it nothing but a little written book,
which happened to be lying above, and contained the whole drama of Goliath and
David. With this booty I made good my retreat into the garret.
"Henceforth all my stolen hours of solitude were devoted to perusing the play, to
learning it by heart, and picturing in thought how glorious it would be, could I but get
the figures, to make them move along with it. In idea I myself became David and
Goliath by turns. In every corner of the court-yard, of the stables, of the garden, under
all kinds of circumstances, I labored to stamp the whole piece upon my mind; laid hold
of all the characters, and learned their speeches by heart, most commonly, however,
taking up the parts of the chief personages, and allowing all the rest to move along
with them, but as satellites, across my memory. Thus day and night the heroic words
of David, wherewith he challenged the braggart giant, Goliath of Gath, kept their place
in my thoughts. I often muttered them to myself; while no one gave heed to me,
except my father, who, frequently observing some such detached exclamation, would
in secret praise the excellent memory of his boy, that had retained so much from only
two recitations.
"By this means growing bolder and bolder, I one evening repeated almost the entire
piece before my mother, whilst I was busied in fashioning some bits of wax into
players. She observed it, questioned me hard; and I confessed.
"By good fortune, this detection happened at a time when the lieutenant had himself
been expressing a wish to initiate me in the mysteries of the art. My mother forthwith
gave him notice of these unexpected talents; and he now contrived to make my
parents offer him a couple of chambers in the top story, which commonly stood
empty, that he might accommodate the spectators in the one, while the other held his
actors, the proscenium again filling up the opening of the door: my father had allowed
his friend to arrange all this; himself, in the mean time, seeming only to look at the
transaction, as it were, through his fingers; for his maxim was, that children should not
be allowed to see the kindness which is felt towards them, lest their pretensions come
to extend too far. He was of opinion, that, in the enjoyments of the young, one should

assume a serious air; often interrupting the course of their festivities, to prevent their
satisfaction from degenerating into excess and presumption."

CHAPTER VI.
"The lieutenant now set up his theatre, and managed all the rest. During the week I
readily observed that he often came into the house at unusual hours, and I soon
guessed the cause. My eagerness increased immensely; for I well understood, that, till
Sunday evening, I could have no share in what was going on. At last the wished-for day
arrived. At five in the evening my conductor came, and took me up with him. Quivering
with joy, I entered, and descried, on both sides of the framework, the puppets all
hanging in order as they were to advance to view. I considered them narrowly, and
mounted on the steps, which raised them above the scene, and allowed me to hover
aloft over all that little world. Not without reverence did I look down between the
pieces of board, and recollect what a glorious effect the whole would produce, and
feel into what mighty secrets I was now admitted. We made a trial, which succeeded
well.
"Next day a party of children were invited: we performed rarely; except that once, in
the fire of action, I let poor Jonathan fall, and was obliged to reach down with my
hand, and pick him up,—an accident which sadly marred the illusion, produced a peal
of laughter, and vexed me unspeakably. My father, however, seemed to relish this
misfortune not a little. Prudently shrouding up the contentment he felt at the
expertness of his little boy, after the play was finished, he dwelt on the mistakes we
had committed, saying it would all have been very pretty had not this or that gone
wrong with us.
"I was vexed to the heart at these things, and sad for all the evening. By next morning,
however, I had quite slept off my sorrow, and was blessed in the persuasion, that, but
for this one fault, I had acted delightfully. The spectators also flattered me with their
unanimous approval: they all maintained, that though the lieutenant, in regard to the
coarse and the fine voices, had done great things, yet his declamation was in general
too stiff and affected; whereas the new aspirant spoke his Jonathan and David with
exquisite grace. My mother in particular commended the gallant tone in which I had
challenged Goliath, and acted the modest victor before the king.
"From this time, to my extreme delight, the theatre continued open; and as the spring
advanced, so that fires could be dispensed with, I passed all my hours of recreation
lying in the garret, and making the puppets caper and play together. Often I invited up
my comrades, or my brothers and sisters; but, when they would not come, I staid by

myself not the less. My imagination brooded over that tiny world, which soon
afterwards acquired another form.
"Scarcely had I once or twice exhibited the first play, for which my scenery and actors
had been formed and decorated, when it ceased to give me any pleasure. On the other
hand, among some of my grandfather's books, I had happened to fall in with 'The
German Theatre,' and a few translations of Italian operas; in which works I soon got
very deeply immersed, on each occasion first reckoning up the characters, and then,
without further ceremony, proceeding to exhibit the play. King Saul, with his black
velvet cloak, was therefore now obliged to personate Darius or Cato, or some other
pagan hero; in which cases, it may be observed, the plays were never wholly
represented,—for most part, only the fifth acts, where the cutting and stabbing lay.
"It was natural that the operas, with their manifold adventures and vicissitudes, should
attract me more than any thing beside. In these compositions I found stormy seas,
gods descending in chariots of cloud, and, what most of all delighted me, abundance of
thunder and lightning. I did my best with pasteboard, paint, and paper: I could make
night very prettily; my lightning was fearful to behold; only my thunder did not always
prosper, which, however, was of less importance. In operas, moreover, I found
frequent opportunities of introducing my David and Goliath,—persons whom the
regular drama would hardly admit. Daily I felt more attachment for the hampered spot
where I enjoyed so many pleasures; and, I must confess, the fragrance which the
puppets had acquired from the storeroom added not a little to my satisfaction.
"The decorations of my theatre were now in a tolerable state of completeness. I had
always had the knack of drawing with compasses, and clipping pasteboard, and
coloring figures; and here it served me in good stead. But the more sorry was I, on the
other hand, when, as frequently happened, my stock of actors would not suffice for
representing great affairs.
"My sisters, dressing and undressing their dolls, awoke in me the project of furnishing
my heroes by and by with garments which might also be put off and on. Accordingly, I
slit the scraps of cloth from off their bodies, tacked the fragments together as well as
possible, saved a particle of money to buy new ribbons and lace, begged many a rag of
taffeta, and so formed, by degrees, a full theatrical wardrobe, in which hoop-petticoats
for the ladies were especially remembered.

"My troop was now fairly provided with dresses for the most important play, and you
might have expected that henceforth one exhibition would follow close upon the heels
of another; but it happened with me, as it often happens with children,—they embrace
wide plans, make mighty preparations, then a few trials, and the whole undertaking is
abandoned. I was guilty of this fault. My greatest pleasure lay in the inventive part, and
the employment of my fancy. This or that piece inspired me with interest for a few
scenes of it, and immediately I set about providing new apparel suitable for the
occasion. In such fluctuating operations, many parts of the primary dresses of my
heroes had fallen into disorder, or totally gone out of sight; so that now the first great
play could no longer be exhibited. I surrendered myself to my imagination; I rehearsed
and prepared forever; built a thousand castles in the air, and failed to see that I was at
the same time undermining the foundations of these little edifices."
During this recital, Mariana had called up and put in action all her courtesy for
Wilhelm, that she might conceal her sleepiness. Diverting as the matter seemed on
one side, it was too simple for her taste, and her lover's view of it too serious. She
softly pressed her foot on his, however, and gave him all visible signs of attention and
approval. She drank out of his glass: Wilhelm was convinced that no word of his history
had fallen to the ground. After a short pause, he said, "It is now your turn, Mariana, to
tell me what were your first childish joys. Till now we have always been too busy with
the present to trouble ourselves, on either side, about our previous way of life. Let me
hear, Mariana, under what circumstances you were reared: what are the first lively
impressions which you still remember?"
These questions would have very much embarrassed Mariana, had not Barbara made
haste to help her. "Think you," said the cunning old woman, "we have been so mindful
of what happened to us long ago, that we have merry things like these to talk about,
and, though we had, that we could give them such an air in talking of them?"
"As if they needed it!" cried Wilhelm. "I love this soft, good, amiable creature so much,
that I regret every instant of my life which has not been spent beside her. Allow me, at
least in fancy, to have a share in thy by-gone life; tell me every thing; I will tell every
thing to thee! If possible, we will deceive ourselves, and win back those days that have
been lost to love."
"If you require it so eagerly," replied the old dame, "we can easily content you. Only, in
the first place, let us hear how your taste for the theatre gradually reached a head;
how you practised, how you improved so happily, that now you can pass for a superior

actor. No doubt you must have met with droll adventures in your progress. It is not
worth while to go to bed now: I have still one flask in reserve; and who knows whether
we shall soon all sit together so quiet and cheery again?"
Mariana cast upon her a mournful look, not noticed by Wilhelm, who proceeded with
his narrative.

CHAPTER VII.
"The recreations of youth, as my companions began to increase in number, interfered
with this solitary, still enjoyment. I was by turns a hunter, a soldier, a knight, as our
games required; and constantly I had this small advantage above the rest, that I was
qualified to furnish them suitably with the necessary equipments. The swords, for
example, were generally of my manufacture; I gilded and decorated the scabbards;
and a secret instinct allowed me not to stop till our militia was accoutred according to
the antique model. Helmets, with plumes of paper, were got ready; shields, even coats
of mail, were provided; undertakings in which such of the servants as had aught of the
tailor in them, and the seamstresses of the house, broke many a needle.
"A part of my comrades I had now got well equipped; by degrees, the rest were
likewise furbished up, though on a thriftier plan; and so a very seemly corps at length
was mustered. We marched about the court-yards and gardens, smote fearfully upon
each other's shields and heads: many flaws of discord rose among us, but none that
lasted.
"This diversion greatly entertained my fellows; but scarcely had it been twice or thrice
repeated, when it ceased to content me. The aspect of so many harnessed figures
naturally stimulated in my mind those ideas of chivalry, which for some time, since I
had commenced the reading of old romances, were filling my imagination.
"Koppen's translation of 'Jerusalem Delivered' at length fell into my hands, and gave
these wandering thoughts a settled direction. The whole poem, it is true, I could not
read; but there were passages which I learned by heart, and the images expressed in
these hovered round me. Particularly was I captivated with Clorinda, and all her deeds
and bearing. The masculine womanhood, the peaceful completeness of her being, had
a greater influence upon my mind, just beginning to unfold itself, than the factitious
charms of Armida; though the garden of that enchantress was by no means an object
of my contempt.
"But a hundred and a hundred times, while walking in the evenings on the balcony
which stretches along the front of the house, and looking over the neighborhood, as
the quivering splendor streamed up at the horizon from the departed sun, and the
stars came forth, and night pressed forward from every cleft and hollow, and the
small, shrill tone of the cricket tinkled through the solemn stillness,—a hundred and

a hundred times have I repeated to myself the history of the mournful duel between
Tancred and Clorinda.
"However strongly I inclined by nature to the party of the Christians, I could not help
declaring for the Paynim heroine with all my heart when she engaged to set on fire the
great tower of the besiegers. And when Tancred in the darkness met the supposed
knight, and the strife began between them under that veil of gloom, and the two
battled fiercely, I could never pronounce the words,—
"'But now the sure and fated hour is nigh:Clorinda's course is ended,—she must die;'—
without tears rushing into my eyes, which flowed plentifully when the hapless lover,
plunging his sword into her breast, opened the departing warrior's helmet, recognized
the lady of his heart, and, shuddering, brought water to baptize her.
"How my heart ran over when Tancred struck with his sword that tree in the
enchanted wood; when blood flowed from the gash, and a voice sounded in his ears,
that now again he was wounding Clorinda; that Destiny had marked him out ever
unwittingly to injure what he loved beyond all else.
"The recital took such hold of my imagination, that what I had read of the poem began
dimly, in my mind, to conglomerate into a whole; wherewith I was so taken that I could
not but propose to have it some way represented. I meant to have Tancred and
Rinaldo acted; and, for this purpose, two coats of mail, which I had before
manufactured, seemed expressly suitable. The one, formed of dark-gray paper with
scales, was to serve for the solemn Tancred; the other, of silver and gilt paper, for the
magnificent Rinaldo. In the vivacity of my anticipations, I told the whole project to my
comrades, who felt quite charmed with it, except that they could not well comprehend
how so glorious a thing could be exhibited, and, above all, exhibited by them.
"Such scruples I easily set aside. Without hesitation, I took upon me, in idea, the
management of two rooms in the house of a neighboring playmate; not calculating
that his venerable aunt would never give them up, or considering how a theatre could
be made of them, whereof I had no settled notion, except that it was to be fixed on
beams, to have side-scenes made of parted folding-screens, and on the floor a large
piece of cloth. From what quarter these materials and furnishings were to come, I had
not determined.

"So far as concerned the forest, we fell upon a good expedient. We betook ourselves
to an old servant of one of our families, who had now become a woodman, with many
entreaties that he would get us a few young firs and birches; which actually arrived
more speedily than we had reason to expect. But, in the next place, great was our
embarrassment as to how the piece should be got up before the trees were withered.
Now was the time for prudent counsel. We had no house, no scenery, no curtain: the
folding-screens were all we had.
"In this forlorn condition we again applied to the lieutenant, giving him a copious
description of all the glorious things we meant to do. Little as he understood us, he
was very helpful: he piled all the tables he could get in the house or neighborhood, one
above the other, in a little room: to these he fixed our folding-screens, and made a
back-view with green curtains, sticking up our trees along with it.
"At length the appointed evening came: the candles were lit, the maids and children
were sitting in their places, the piece was to go forward, the whole corps of heroes was
equipped and dressed,—when each for the first time discovered that he knew not
what he was to say. In the heat of invention, being quite immersed in present
difficulties, I had forgotten the necessity of each understanding what and where he
was to speak; nor, in the midst of our bustling preparations, had it once occurred to
the rest; each believing he could easily enact a hero, easily so speak and bear himself,
as became the personage into whose world I had transplanted him. They all stood
wonder-struck, asking, What was to come first? I alone, having previously got ready
Tancred's part, entered solus on the scene, and began reciting some verses of the epic.
But as the passage soon changed into narrative, and I, while speaking, was at once
transformed into a third party, and the bold Godfredo, when his turn came, would not
venture forth, I was at last obliged to take leave of my spectators under peals of
laughter,—a disaster which cut me to the heart. Thus had our undertaking proved
abortive; but the company still kept their places, still wishing to see something. All of
us were dressed: I screwed my courage up, and determined, foul or fair, to give them
David and Goliath. Some of my companions had before this helped me to exhibit the
puppet-play; all of them had often seen it; we shared the characters among us; each
promised to do his best; and one small, grinning urchin painted a black beard upon his
chin, and undertook, if any lacuna should occur, to fill it with drollery as harlequin,—an
arrangement to which, as contradicting the solemnity of the piece, I did not consent
without extreme reluctance; and I vowed within myself, that, if once delivered out of

this perplexity, I would think long and well before risking the exhibition of another
play."

CHAPTER VIII.
Mariana, overpowered with sleep, leaned upon her lover, who clasped her close to
him, and proceeded in his narrative; while the old damsel prudently sipped up the
remainder of the wine.
"The embarrassment," he said, "into which, along with my companions, I had fallen, by
attempting to act a play that did not anywhere exist, was soon forgotten. My passion
for representing each romance I read, each story that was told me, would not yield
before the most unmanageable materials. I felt convinced that whatever gave delight
in narrative must produce a far deeper impression when exhibited: I wanted to have
every thing before my eyes, every thing brought forth upon the stage. At school, when
the elements of general history were related to us, I carefully marked the passages
where any person had been slain or poisoned in a singular way; and my imagination,
glancing rapidly along the exposition and intrigue, hastened to the interesting fifth act.
Indeed, I actually began to write some plays from the end backwards, without,
however, in any of them reaching the beginning.
"At the same time, partly by inclination, partly by the counsel of my good friends, who
had caught the fancy of acting plays, I read a whole wilderness of theatrical
productions, as chance put them into my hands. I was still in those happy years when
all things please us, when number and variety yield us abundant satisfaction.
Unfortunately, too, my taste was corrupted by another circumstance. Any piece
delighted me especially, in which I could hope to give delight; there were few which I
did not peruse in this agreeable delusion: and my lively conceptive power enabling me
to transfer myself into all the characters, seduced me to believe that I might likewise
represent them all. Hence, in the distribution of the parts, I commonly selected such as
did not fit me, and always more than one part, if I could by any means accomplish
more.
"In their games, children can make all things out of any: a staff becomes a musket, a
splinter of wood a sword, any bunch of cloth a puppet, any crevice a chamber. Upon
this principle was our private theatre got up. Totally unacquainted with the measure of
our strength, we undertook all: we stuck at no quid pro quo, and felt convinced that
every one would take us for what we gave ourselves out to be. Now, however, our
affairs went on so soberly and smoothly, that I have not even a curious insipidity to tell
you of. We first acted all the few plays in which only males are requisite, next we
travestied some of ourselves, and at last took our sisters into the concern along with

us. In one or two houses, our amusement was looked upon as profitable; and company
was invited to see it. Nor did our lieutenant of artillery now turn his back upon us. He
showed us how we ought to make our exits and our entrances; how we should
declaim, and with what attitudes and gestures. Yet generally he earned small thanks
for his toil, we conceiving ourselves to be much deeper in the secrets of theatrical art
than he himself was.
"We very soon began to grow tired of tragedy; for all of us believed, as we had often
heard, that it was easier to write or represent a tragedy than to attain proficiency in
comedy. In our first attempts, accordingly, we had felt as if exactly in our element:
dignity of rank, elevation of character, we studied to approach by stiffness and
affectation, and imagined that we succeeded rarely; but our happiness was not
complete, except we might rave outright, might stamp with our feet, and, full of fury
and despair, cast ourselves upon the ground.
"Boys and girls had not long carried on these amusements in concert, till Nature began
to take her course; and our society branched itself off into sundry little loveassociations, as generally more than one sort of comedy is acted in the playhouse.
Behind the scenes, each happy pair pressed hands in the most tender style; they
floated in blessedness, appearing to one another quite ideal persons, when so
transformed and decorated; whilst, on the other hand, unlucky rivals consumed
themselves with envy, and out of malice and spite worked every species of mischief.
"Our amusements, though undertaken without judgment, and carried on without
instruction, were not without their use to us. We trained our memories and persons,
and acquired more dexterity in speech and gesture than is usually met with at so early
an age. But, for me in particular, this time was in truth an epoch: my mind turned all its
faculties exclusively to the theatre; and my highest happiness was in reading, in
writing, or in acting, plays.
"Meanwhile the labors of my regular teachers continued: I had been set apart for the
mercantile life, and placed under the guidance of our neighbor in the counting-house;
yet my spirit at this very time recoiled more forcibly than ever from all that was to bind
me to a low profession. It was to the stage that I aimed at consecrating all my
powers,—on the stage that I meant to seek all my happiness and satisfaction.
"I recollect a poem, which must be among my papers, where the Muse of tragic art
and another female form, by which I personified Commerce, were made to strive very

bravely for my most important self. The idea is common, nor do I recollect that the
verses were of any worth; but you shall see it, for the sake of the fear, the abhorrence,
the love and passion, which are prominent in it. How repulsively did I paint the old
housewife, with the distaff in her girdle, the bunch of keys by her side, the spectacles
on her nose, ever toiling, ever restless, quarrelsome, and penurious, pitiful and
dissatisfied! How feelingly did I describe the condition of that poor man who has to
cringe beneath her rod, and earn his slavish day's wages by the sweat of his brow!
"And how differently advanced the other! What an apparition for the overclouded
mind! Formed as a queen, in her thoughts and looks she announced herself the child of
freedom. The feeling of her own worth gave her dignity without pride: her apparel
became her, it veiled her form without constraining it; and the rich folds repeated, like
a thousand-voiced echo, the graceful movements of the goddess. What a contrast!
How easy for me to decide! Nor had I forgotten the more peculiar characteristics of my
Muse. Crowns and daggers, chains and masks, as my predecessors had delivered them,
were here produced once more. The contention was keen: the speeches of both were
palpably enough contrasted, for at fourteen years of age one usually paints the black
lines and the white pretty near each other. The old lady spoke as beseemed a person
that would pick up a pin from her path; the other, like one that could give away
kingdoms. The warning threats of the housewife were disregarded; I turned my back
upon her promised riches: disinherited and naked, I gave myself up to the Muse; she
threw her golden veil over me, and called me hers.
"Could I have thought, my dearest," he exclaimed, pressing Mariana close to him, "that
another, a more lovely goddess would come to encourage me in my purpose, to travel
with me on my journey, the poem might have had a finer turn, a far more interesting
end. Yet it is no poetry, it is truth and life that I feel in thy arms: let us prize the sweet
happiness, and consciously enjoy it."
The pressure of his arms, the emotion of his elevated voice, awoke Mariana, who
hastened by caresses to conceal her embarrassment; for no word of the last part of his
story had reached her. It is to be wished, that in future, our hero, when recounting his
favorite histories, may find more attentive hearers.

CHAPTER IX.
Thus Wilhelm passed his nights in the enjoyment of confiding love, his days in the
expectation of new happy hours. When desire and hope had first attracted him to
Mariana, he already felt as if inspired with new life; felt as if he were beginning to be
another man: he was now united to her; the contentment of his wishes had become a
delicious habitude. His heart strove to ennoble the object of his passion; his spirit, to
exalt with it the young creature whom he loved. In the shortest absence, thoughts of
her arose within him. If she had once been necessary to him, she was now grown
indispensable, now that he was bound to her by all the ties of nature. His pure soul felt
that she was the half, more than the half, of himself. He was grateful and devoted
without limit.
Mariana, too, succeeded in deceiving herself for a season: she shared with him the
feeling of his liveliest blessedness. Alas! if but the cold hand of self-reproach had not
often come across her heart! She was not secure from it, even in Wilhelm's bosom,
even under the wings of his love. And when she was again left alone, again left to sink
from the clouds, to which passion had exalted her, into the consciousness of her real
condition, then she was indeed to be pitied. So long as she had lived among degrading
perplexities, disguising from herself her real situation, or rather never thinking of it,
frivolity had helped her through; the incidents she was exposed to had come upon her
each by itself; satisfaction and vexation had cancelled one another; humiliation had
been compensated by vanity; want by frequent, though momentary, superfluity; she
could plead necessity and custom as a law or an excuse; and hitherto all painful
emotions from hour to hour, and from day to day, had by these means been shaken
off. But now, for some instants, the poor girl had felt herself transported to a better
world; aloft, as it were, in the midst of light and joy, she had looked down upon the
abject desert of her life, had felt what a miserable creature is the woman, who,
inspiring desire, does not also inspire reverence and love: she regretted and repented,
but found herself outwardly or inwardly no better for regret. She had nothing that she
could accomplish or resolve upon. When she looked into and searched herself, all was
waste and void within her soul: her heart had no place of strength or refuge. But the
more sorrowful her state was, the more vehemently did her feelings cling to the man
she loved: her passion for him even waxed stronger daily, as the danger of losing him
came daily nearer.

Wilhelm, on the other hand, soared serenely happy in higher regions: to him also a
new world had been disclosed, but a world rich in the most glorious prospects.
Scarcely had the first excess of joy subsided, when all that had long been gliding dimly
through his soul stood up in bright distinctness before it. She is mine! She has given
herself up to me! She, the loved, the wished for, the adored, has given herself up to
me in trust and faith: she shall not find me ungrateful for the gift. Standing or walking,
he talked to himself; his heart constantly overflowed; with a copiousness of splendid
words, he uttered to himself the loftiest emotions. He imagined that he understood
the visible beckoning of Fate, reaching out its hand by Mariana to save him from the
stagnant, weary, drudging life, out of which he had so often wished for deliverance. To
leave his father's house and people, now appeared a light matter. He was young, and
had not tried the world: his eagerness to range over its expanses, seeking fortune and
contentment, was stimulated by his love. His vocation for the theatre was now clear to
him: the high goal, which he saw raised before him, seemed nearer whilst he was
advancing to it with Mariana's hand in his; and, in his comfortable prudence, he beheld
in himself the embryo of a great actor,—the future founder of that national theatre,
for which he heard so much and various sighing on every side. All that till now had
slumbered in the innermost corners of his soul, at length awoke. He painted for
himself a picture of his manifold ideas, in the colors of love, upon a canvas of cloud:
the figures of it, indeed, ran sadly into one another; yet the whole had an air but the
more brilliant on that account.

CHAPTER X.
He was now in his chamber at home, ransacking his papers, making ready for
departure. Whatever savored of his previous employment he threw aside, meaning at
his entrance upon life to be free, even from recollections that could pain him. Works of
taste alone, poets and critics, were, as acknowledged friends, placed among the
chosen few. Heretofore he had given little heed to the critical authors: his desire for
instruction now revived, when, again looking through his books, he found the
theoretical part of them lying generally still uncut. In the full persuasion that such
works were absolutely necessary, he had bought a number of them; but, with the best
disposition in the world, he had not reached midway in any.
The more steadfastly, on the other hand, he had dwelt upon examples, and, in every
kind that was known to him, had made attempts himself.
Werner entered the room; and, seeing his friend busied with the well-known sheets,
he exclaimed, "Again among your papers? And without intending, I dare swear, to
finish any one of them! You look them through and through once or twice, then throw
them by, and begin something new."
"To finish is not the scholar's care: it is enough if he improves himself by practice."
"But also completes according to his best ability."
"And still the question might be asked, 'Is there not good hope of a youth, who, on
commencing some unsuitable affair, soon discovers its unsuitableness, and
discontinues his exertions, not choosing to spend toil and time on what never can be
of any value?'"
"I know well enough it was never your concern to bring aught to a conclusion: you
have always sickened on it before it came half way. When you were the director of our
puppet-show, for instance, how many times were fresh clothes got ready for the
dwarfish troop, fresh decorations furbished up? Now this tragedy was to be acted,
now that; and at the very best you gave us some fifth act, where all was going topsyturvy, and people cutting one another's throats."
"If you talk of those times, whose blame really was it that we ripped off from our
puppets the clothes that fitted them, and were fast stitched to their bodies, and laid
out money for a large and useless wardrobe? Was it not yours, my good friend, who

had always some fragment of ribbon to traffic with; and skill, at the same time, to
stimulate my taste, and turn it to your profit?"
Werner laughed, and continued, "I still recollect, with pleasure, how I used to extract
gain from your theatrical campaigns, as army contractors do from war. When you
mustered for the 'Deliverance of Jerusalem,' I, for my part, made a pretty thing of
profit, like the Venetians in the corresponding case. I know of nothing in the world
more rational than to turn the folly of others to our own advantage."
"Perhaps it were a nobler satisfaction to cure men of their follies."
"From the little I know of men, this might seem a vain endeavor. But something
towards it is always done, when any individual man grows wise and rich; and generally
this happens at the cost of others."
"Well, here is 'The Youth at the Parting of the Ways;' it has just come into my hand,"
said Wilhelm, drawing out a bunch of papers from the rest; "this at least is finished,
whatever else it may be."
"Away with it! to the fire with it!" cried Werner. "The invention does not deserve the
smallest praise: that affair has plagued me enough already, and drawn upon yourself
your father's wrath. The verses may be altogether beautiful, but the meaning of them
is

fundamentally

false.

I

still

recollect

your

Commerce

personified:

a

shrivelled, wretched-looking sibyl she was. I suppose you picked up the image of her
from some miserable huckster's shop. At that time you had no true idea at all of trade;
whilst I could not think of any man whose spirit was, or needed to be, more enlarged
than the spirit of a genuine merchant. What a thing is it to see the order which prevails
throughout his business! By means of this he can at any time survey the general whole,
without needing to perplex himself in the details. What advantages does he derive
from the system of book-keeping by double entry! It is among the finest inventions of
the human mind: every prudent master of a house should introduce it into his
economy."
"Pardon me," said Wilhelm, smiling; "you begin by the form, as if it were the matter:
you traders commonly, in your additions and balancings, forget what is the proper net
result of life."

"My good friend, you do not see how form and matter are in this case one, how
neither can exist without the other. Order and arrangement increase the desire to save
and get. A man embarrassed in his circumstances, and conducting them imprudently,
likes best to continue in the dark: he will not gladly reckon up the debtor entries he is
charged with. But, on the other hand, there is nothing to a prudent manager more
pleasant than daily to set before himself the sums of his growing fortune. Even a
mischance, if it surprise and vex, will not affright, him; for he knows at once what gains
he has acquired to cast into the other scale. I am convinced, my friend, that, if you
once had a proper taste for our employments, you would grant that many faculties of
the mind are called into full and vigorous play by them."
"Possibly this journey I am thinking of may bring me to other thoughts."
"Oh, certainly! Believe me, you want but to look upon some great scene of activity to
make you ours forever; and, when you come back, you will joyfully enroll yourself
among that class of men whose art it is to draw towards themselves a portion of the
money, and materials of enjoyment, which circulate in their appointed courses
through the world. Cast a look on the natural and artificial productions of all the
regions of the earth; consider how they have become, one here, another there, articles
of necessity for men. How pleasant and how intellectual a task is it to calculate, at any
moment, what is most required, and yet is wanting, or hard to find; to procure for each
easily and soon what he demands; to lay in your stock prudently beforehand, and then
to enjoy the profit of every pulse in that mighty circulation. This, it appears to me, is
what no man that has a head can attend to without pleasure."
Wilhelm seemed to acquiesce, and Werner continued.
"Do but visit one or two great trading-towns, one or two seaports, and see if you can
withstand the impression. When you observe how many men are busied, whence so
many things have come, and whither they are going, you will feel as if you, too, could
gladly mingle in the business. You will then see the smallest piece of ware in its
connection with the whole mercantile concern; and for that very reason you will
reckon nothing paltry, because every thing augments the circulation by which you
yourself are supported."
Werner had formed his solid understanding in constant intercourse with Wilhelm; he
was thus accustomed to think also of his profession, of his employments, with
elevation of soul; and he firmly believed that he did so with more justice than his

otherwise more gifted and valued friend, who, as it seemed to him, had placed his
dearest hopes, and directed all the force of his mind, upon the most imaginary objects
in the world. Many a time he thought his false enthusiasm would infallibly be got the
better of, and so excellent a soul be brought back to the right path. So hoping in the
present instance, he continued, "The great ones of the world have taken this earth of
ours to themselves; they live in the midst of splendor and superfluity. The smallest
nook of the land is already a possession which none may touch or meddle with: offices
and civil callings bring in little profit. Where, then, will you find more honest
acquisitions, juster conquests, than those of trade? If the princes of this world hold the
rivers, the highways, the havens, in their power, and take a heavy tribute from every
thing that passes through them, may not we embrace with joy the opportunity of
levying tax and toll, by our activity, on those commodities which the real or imaginary
wants of men have rendered indispensable? I can promise you, if you would rightly
apply your poetic view, my goddess might be represented as an invincible, victorious
queen, and boldly opposed to yours. It is true, she bears the olive rather than the
sword: dagger or chain she knows not. But she, too, gives crowns to her
favorites; which, without offence to yours be it said, are of true gold from the furnace
and the mine, and glance with genuine pearls, which she brings up from the depths of
the ocean by the hands of her unwearied servants."
This sally somewhat nettled Wilhelm; but he concealed his sentiments, remembering
that Werner used to listen with composure to his apostrophes. Besides, he had
fairness enough to be pleased at seeing each man think the best of his own peculiar
craft, provided only his, of which he was so passionately fond, were likewise left in
peace.
"And for you," exclaimed Werner, "who take so warm an interest in human concerns,
what a sight will it be to behold the fortune, which accompanies bold undertakings,
distributed to men before your eyes! What is more spirit-stirring than the aspect of a
ship arriving from a lucky voyage, or soon returning with a rich capture? Not only the
relatives, the acquaintances, and those that share with the adventurers, but every
unconcerned spectator also, is excited, when he sees the joy with which the longimprisoned shipman springs on land before his keel has wholly reached it, feeling that
he is free once more, and now can trust what he has rescued from the false sea to the
firm and faithful earth. It is not, my friend, in figures of arithmetic alone that gain
presents itself before us. Fortune is the goddess of breathing men: to feel her favors

truly, we must live and be men who toil with their living minds and bodies, and enjoy
with them also."

CHAPTER XI.
It is now time that we should know something more of Wilhelm's father and of
Werner's,—two men of very different modes of thinking, but whose opinions so far
coincided, that both regarded commerce as the noblest calling; and both were
peculiarly attentive to every advantage which any kind of speculation might produce to
them. Old Meister, when his father died, had turned into money a valuable collection
of pictures, drawings, copper-plates, and antiquities: he had entirely rebuilt and
furnished his house in the newest style, and turned his other property to profit in all
possible ways. A considerable portion of it he had embarked in trade, under the
direction of the elder Werner,—a man noted as an active merchant, whose
speculations were commonly favored by fortune. But nothing was so much desired by
Meister as to confer upon his son those qualities of which himself was destitute, and
to leave his children advantages which he reckoned it of the highest importance to
possess. Withal, he felt a peculiar inclination for magnificence,—for whatever catches
the eye, and possesses at the same time real worth and durability. In his house he
would have all things solid and massive; his stores must be copious and rich, all his
plate must be heavy, the furniture of his table must be costly. On the other hand, his
guests were seldom invited; for every dinner was a festival, which, both for its expense
and for its inconvenience, could not often be repeated. The economy of his house
went on at a settled, uniform rate; and every thing that moved or had place in it was
just what yielded no one any real enjoyment.
The elder Werner, in his dark and hampered house, led quite another sort of life. The
business of the day, in his narrow counting-house, at his ancient desk, once done,
Werner liked to eat well, and, if possible, to drink better. Nor could he fully enjoy good
things in solitude; with his family he must always see at table his friends, and any
stranger that had the slightest connection with his house. His chairs were of unknown
age and antic fashion, but he daily invited some to sit on them. The dainty victuals
arrested the attention of his guests, and none remarked that they were served up in
common ware. His cellar held no great stock of wine, but the emptied niches were
usually filled by more of a superior sort.
So lived these two fathers, often meeting to take counsel about their common
concerns. On the day we are speaking of, it had been determined to send Wilhelm out
from home, for the despatch of some commercial affairs.

"Let him look about him in the world," said old Meister, "and at the same time carry on
our business in distant parts. One cannot do a young man any greater kindness than
initiate him early in the future business of his life. Your son returned so happily from
his first expedition, and transacted his affairs so cleverly, that I am very curious to see
how mine will do: his experience, I fear, will cost him dearer."
Old Meister had a high notion of his son's faculties and capabilities: he said this in the
hope that his friend would contradict him, and hold up to view the admirable gifts of
the youth. Here, however, he deceived himself. Old Werner, who, in practical
concerns, would trust no man but such as he had proved, answered placidly, "One
must try all things. We can send him on the same journey: we shall give him a paper of
directions to conduct him. There are sundry debts to be gathered in, old connections
are to be renewed, new ones to be made. He may likewise help the speculation I was
lately talking of; for, without punctual intelligence gathered on the spot, there is little
to be done in it."
"He must prepare," said Meister, "and set forth as soon as possible. Where shall we
get a horse for him to suit this business?"
"We shall not seek far. The shopkeeper in H——, who owes us somewhat, but is withal
a good man, has offered me a horse instead of payment. My son knows it, and tells me
it is a serviceable beast."
"He may fetch it himself. Let him go with the diligence; the day after to-morrow he is
back again betimes; we have his saddle-bags and letters made ready in the mean time;
he can set out on Monday morning."
Wilhelm was sent for, and informed of their determination. Who so glad as he, now
seeing the means of executing his purpose put into his hands, the opportunity made
ready for him, without co-operation of his own! So intense was his love, so full was his
conviction of the perfect rectitude of his intention to escape from the pressure of his
actual mode of life, and follow a new and nobler career, that his conscience did not in
the least rebel; no anxiety arose within him; he even reckoned the deception he was
meditating holy. He felt certain, that, in the long-run, parents and relations would
praise and bless him for this resolution: he acknowledged in these concurring
circumstances the signal of a guiding fate.

How slowly the time passed with him till night, till the hour when he should again see
his Mariana! He sat in his chamber, and revolved the plan of his journey; as a conjurer,
or a cunning thief in durance, often draws out his feet from the fast-locked irons, to
cherish in himself the conviction that his deliverance is possible, nay, nearer than
short-sighted turnkeys believe.
At last the appointed hour struck: he went out, shook off all anxiety, and hastened
through the silent streets. In the middle of the great square he raised his hands to the
sky, feeling as if all was behind him and below him: he had freed himself from all. One
moment he figured himself as in the arms of his beloved, the next as glancing with her
in the splendors of the stage: he soared aloft in a world of hopes, only now and then
the call of some watchman brought to his recollection that he was still wandering on
the vulgar earth.
Mariana came to the stairs to meet him,—and how beautiful, how lovely! She received
him in the new white negligée: he thought he had never seen her so charming. Thus
did she handsel the gift of her absent lover in the arms of a present one; with true
passion she lavished on her darling the whole treasure of those caresses which nature
suggested, or art had taught: need we ask if he was happy, if he was blessed?
He disclosed to her what had passed, and showed her, in general terms, his plan and
his wishes. He would try, he said, to find a residence, then come back for her: he
hoped she would not refuse him her hand. The poor girl was silent: she concealed her
tears, and pressed her friend against her bosom. Wilhelm, though interpreting her
silence in the most favorable manner, could have wished for a distinct reply; and still
more, when at last he inquired of her in the tenderest and most delicate terms, if he
might not think himself a father. But to this she answered only with a sigh, with a kiss.

CHAPTER XII.
Next morning Mariana awoke only to new despondency; she felt herself very solitary;
she wished not to see the light of day, but staid in bed, and wept. Old Barbara sat
down by her, and tried to persuade and console her; but it was not in her power so
soon to heal the wounded heart. The moment was now at hand to which the poor girl
had been looking forward as to the last of her life. Who could be placed in a more
painful situation? The man she loved was departing; a disagreeable lover was
threatening to come; and the most fearful mischiefs were to be anticipated, if the two,
as might easily happen, should meet together.
"Calm yourself, my dear," said the old woman: "do not spoil your pretty eyes with
crying. Is it, then, so terrible a thing to have two lovers? And though you can bestow
your love but on the one, yet be thankful to the other, who, caring for you as he does,
certainly deserves to be named your friend."
"My poor Wilhelm," said the other, all in tears, "had warning that a separation was at
hand. A dream discovered to him what we strove so much to hide. He was sleeping
calmly at my side; on a sudden I heard him mutter some unintelligible sounds: I grew
frightened, and awoke him. Ah! with what love and tenderness and warmth did he
clasp me! 'O Mariana!' cried he, 'what a horrid fate have you freed me from! How shall
I thank you for deliverance from such torment? I dreamed that I was far from you in an
unknown country, but your figure hovered before me; I saw you on a beautiful hill, the
sunshine was glancing over it all; how charming you looked! But it had not lasted long,
before I observed your image sinking down, sinking, sinking: I stretched out my arms
towards you; they could not reach you through the distance. Your image still kept
gliding down: it approached a great sea that lay far extended at the foot of the hill,—a
marsh rather than a sea. All at once a man gave you his hand, and seemed meaning to
conduct you upwards; but he led you sidewards, and appeared to draw you after him. I
cried out: as I could not reach you, I hoped to warn you. If I tried to walk, the ground
seemed to hold me fast; if I could walk, the water hindered me; and even my cries
were smothered in my breast.' So said the poor youth, while recovering from his
terror, and reckoning himself happy to see a frightful dream thrust aside by the most
delicious reality."
Barbara made every effort to reduce, by her prose, the poetry of her friend to the
domain of common life; employing, in the present case, the ingenious craft which so
often succeeds with bird-catchers, when they imitate with a whistle the tones of those

luckless creatures they soon hope to see by dozens safely lodged in their nets. She
praised Wilhelm: she expatiated on his figure, his eyes, his love. The poor girl heard
her with a gratified heart, then arose, let herself be dressed, and appeared calmer.
"My child, my darling," continued the old woman, in a cozening tone, "I will not
trouble you or injure you: I cannot think of tearing from you your dearest happiness.
Could you mistake my intention? Have you forgotten that on all occasions I have cared
for you more than for myself? Tell me only what you wish: we shall soon see how it
may be brought about."
"What can I wish?" said Mariana; "I am miserable, miserable for life: I love him, and he
loves me; yet I see that I must part with him, and know not how I shall survive it.
Norberg is coming, to whom we owe our whole subsistence, whom we cannot live
without. Wilhelm is straitened in his fortune: he can do nothing for me."
"Yes, unfortunately, he is of those lovers who bring nothing but their hearts; and these
people, too, have the highest pretensions of any."
"No jesting! The unhappy youth thinks of leaving his home, of going upon the stage, of
offering me his hand."
"Of empty hands we have already four."
"I have no choice," continued Mariana; "do you decide for me. Cast me away to this
side or to that: mark only one thing,—I think I carry in my bosom a pledge that ought
to unite me with him still more closely. Consider and determine: whom shall I forsake?
whom shall I follow?"
After a short silence, Barbara exclaimed. "Strange, that youth should always be for
extremes! To my view, nothing would be easier than for us to combine both the profit
and the enjoyment. Do you love the one, let the other pay for it: all we have to mind, is
being sharp enough to keep the two from meeting."
"Do as you please: I can imagine nothing, but I will obey."
"We have this advantage: we can humor the manager's caprice and pride about the
morals of his troop. Both lovers are accustomed already to go secretly and cautiously
to work. For hours and opportunity I will take thought: only henceforth you must act
the part that I prescribe to you. Who knows what circumstances may arise to help us?
If Norberg would arrive even now, when Wilhelm is away! Who can hinder you from

thinking of the one in the arms of the other? I wish you a son, and good fortune with
him: he will have a rich father."
These projects lightened Mariana's despondency only for a very short time. She could
not bring her situation into harmony with her feelings, with her convictions: she would
fain have forgotten the painful relations in which she stood, and a thousand little
circumstances forced them back every moment to her recollection.

CHAPTER XIII.
In the mean time, Wilhelm had completed the short preliminary journey. His merchant
being from home, he delivered the letter of introduction to the mistress of the house.
But neither did this lady give him much furtherance in his purposes: she was in a
violent passion, and her whole economy was in confusion.
He had not waited long when she disclosed to him, what in truth could not be kept a
secret, that her step-daughter had run off with a player,—a person who had parted
lately from a small strolling company, and had staid in the place, and commenced
teaching French. The father, distracted with grief and vexation, had run to the Amt to
have the fugitives pursued. She blamed her daughter bitterly, and vilified the lover, till
she left no tolerable quality with either: she deplored at great length the shame thus
brought upon the family; embarrassing our hero not a little, who here felt his own
private scheme beforehand judged and punished, in the spirit of prophecy as it were,
by this frenzied sibyl. Still stronger and deeper was the interest he took in the sorrows
of the father, who now returned from the Amt, and with fixed sorrow, in broken
sentences, gave his wife an account of the errand, and strove to hide the
embarrassment and distraction of his mind; while, after looking at the letter, he
directed that the horse it spoke of should be given to Wilhelm.
Our friend thought it best to mount his steed immediately, and quit a house where, in
its present state, he could not possibly be comfortable; but the honest man would not
allow the son of one to whom he had so many obligations to depart without tasting of
his hospitality, without remaining at least a night beneath his roof.
Wilhelm had partaken of a melancholy supper, worn out a restless night, and
hastened, early in the morning, to get rid of these people, who, without knowing it,
had, by their narratives and utterances, been constantly wounding him to the quick.
In a musing mood, he was riding slowly along, when all at once he observed a number
of armed men coming through the fields. By their long, loose coats, with enormous
cuffs; by their shapeless hats, clumsy muskets; by their unpretending gait, and
contented bearing of the body,—he recognized in these people a detachment of
provincial militia. They halted beneath an old oak, set down their fire-arms, and placed
themselves at their ease upon the sward, to smoke a pipe of tobacco. Wilhelm lingered
near them, and entered into conversation with a young man who came up on
horseback. The history of the two runaways, which he knew but too well, was again

detailed to him, and that with comments not particularly flattering, either to the young
pair themselves, or to the parents. He also learned that the military had come hither to
take into custody the loving couple, who had already been seized and detained in a
neighboring village. After some time, accordingly, a cart was seen advancing to the
place, encircled with a city guard more ludicrous than appalling. An amorphous townclerk rode forth, and made his compliments to the Actuarius (for such was the young
man Wilhelm had been speaking to), on the border of their several districts, with great
conscientiousness and queer grimaces; as perhaps the ghost and the conjurer do,
when they meet, the one within the circle and the other out of it, in their dismal
midnight operations.
But the chief attention of the lookers-on was directed to the cart: they could not
behold, without compassion, the poor, misguided creatures, who were sitting upon
bundles of straw, looking tenderly at one another, and scarcely seeming to observe the
by-standers. Accident had forced their conductors to bring them from the last village in
that unseemly style; the old chaise, which had previously transported the lady, having
there broken down. On that occurrence she had begged for permission to sit beside
her friend; whom, in the conviction that his crime was of a capital sort, the rustic
bailiffs had so far brought along in irons. These irons certainly contributed to give the
tender group a more interesting appearance, particularly as the young man moved and
bore himself with great dignity, while he kissed more than once the hands of his fair
companion.
"We are unfortunate," she cried to the by-standers, "but not so guilty as we seem. It is
thus that cruel men reward true love; and parents, who entirely neglect the happiness
of their children, tear them with fury from the arms of joy, when it has found them
after many weary days."
The spectators were expressing their sympathy in various ways, when, the officers of
law having finished their ceremonial, the cart went on; and Wilhelm, who took a deep
interest in the fate of the lovers, hastened forward by a foot path to get some
acquaintance with the Amtmann before the procession should arrive. But scarcely had
he reached the Amthaus, where all was in motion, and ready to receive the fugitives,
when his new friend, the Actuarius, laid hold of him; and giving him a circumstantial
detail of the whole proceedings, and then launching out into a comprehensive eulogy
of his own horse, which he had got by barter the night before, put a stop to every
other sort of conversation.

The luckless pair, in the mean time, had been set down behind, at the garden, which
communicated by a little door with the Amthaus, and thus brought in unobserved.
The Actuarius, for this mild and handsome treatment, accepted of a just encomium
from Wilhelm; though in truth his sole object had been to mortify the crowd collected
in front of the Amthaus, by denying them the satisfaction of looking at a neighbor in
disgrace.
The Amtmann, who had no particular taste for such extraordinary occurrences, being
wont on these occasions to commit frequent errors, and, with the best intentions, to
be often paid with sour admonitions from the higher powers, went with heavy steps
into his office-room; the Actuarius with Wilhelm and a few respectable citizens
following him.
The lady was first produced; she advanced without pertness, calm and self-possessed.
The manner of her dress, the way in which she bore herself, showed that she was a
person not without value in her own eyes. She accordingly began, without any
questions being put, to speak, not unskilfully, about her situation.
The Actuarius bade her be silent, and held his pen over the folded sheet.
The Amtmann gathered up his resolution, looked at his assistant, cleared his throat by
two or three hems, and asked the poor girl what was her name, and how old she was.
"I beg your pardon, sir," said she, "but it seems very strange to me that you ask my
name and age, seeing you know very well what my name is, and that I am just of the
age of your oldest son. What you do want to know of me, and need to know, I will tell
freely without circumlocution.
"Since my father's second marriage, my situation in his house has not been of the most
enviable sort. Oftener than once I have had it in my power to make a suitable
marriage, had not my step-mother, dreading the expense of my portion, taken care to
thwart all such proposals. At length I grew acquainted with the young Melina; I felt
constrained to love him; and, as we both foresaw the obstacles that stood in the way
of our regular union, we determined to go forth together, and seek in the wide world
the happiness denied us at home. I took nothing with me that was not my own: we did
not run away like thieves and robbers; and my lover does not merit to be hauled about
in this way, with chains and handcuffs. The prince is just, and will not sanction such
severity. If we are liable to punishment, it is not punishment of this kind."

The old Amtmann hereupon fell into double and treble confusion. Sounds of the most
gracious eulogies were already humming through his brain, and the girl's voluble
speech had entirely confounded the plan of his protocol. The mischief increased, when
to repeated official questions she refused giving any answer, but constantly referred to
what she had already said.
"I am no criminal," she said. "They have brought me hither on bundles of straw to put
me to shame, but there is a higher court that will bring us back to honor."
The Actuarius, in the mean time, had kept writing down her words: he whispered
the Amtmann, "just to go on,—a formal protocol might be made out by and by."
The senior then again took heart, and began, with his heavy words, in dry prescribed
formulas, to seek information about the sweet secrets of love.
The red mounted into Wilhelm's cheeks, and those of the pretty criminal likewise
glowed with the charming tinge of modesty. She was silent, she stammered, till at last
her embarrassment itself seemed to exalt her courage.
"Be assured," she cried, "that I should have strength enough to confess the truth,
though it made against myself; and shall I now hesitate and stammer, when it does me
honor? Yes: from the moment when I first felt certain of his love and faith, I looked
upon him as my husband; I freely gave him all that love requires,—that a heart once
convinced cannot long refuse. Now do with me what you please. If I hesitated for a
moment to confess, it was solely owing to fear lest the admission might prove hurtful
to my lover."
On hearing this confession, Wilhelm formed a high opinion of the young woman's
feelings, while her judges marked her as an impudent strumpet; and the townsfolk
present thanked God that in their families no such scandal had occurred, or at least
been brought to light.
Wilhelm transported his Mariana into this conjuncture, answering at the bar: he put
still finer words in her mouth, making her uprightness yet more affecting, her
confession still nobler. The most violent desire to help the two lovers took possession
of him. Nor did he conceal this feeling, but signified in private to the
wavering Amtmann, that it were better to end the business; all being clear as possible,
and requiring no further investigation.

This was so far of service that the young woman was allowed to retire; though, in her
stead, the lover was brought in, his fetters having previously been taken off him at the
door. This person seemed a little more concerned about his fate. His answers were
more careful; and, if he showed less heroic generosity, he recommended himself by
the precision and distinctness of his expressions.
When this audience also was finished, and found to agree in all points with the former,
except that, from regard for his mistress, Melina stubbornly denied what had already
been confessed by herself, the young woman was again brought forward; and a scene
took place between the two, which made the heart of our friend entirely their own.
What usually occurs nowhere but in romances and plays, he saw here in a paltry courtroom before his eyes,—the contest of reciprocal magnanimity, the strength of love in
misfortune.
"Is it, then, true," said he internally, "that timorous affection, which conceals itself
from the eye of the sun and of men, not daring to taste of enjoyment save in remote
solitude and deep secrecy, yet, if torn rudely by some cruel chance into light, will show
itself more courageous, strong, and resolute than any of our loud and ostentatious
passions?"
To his comfort, the business now soon came to a conclusion. The lovers were detained
in tolerable quarters: had it been possible, he would that very evening have brought
back the young lady to her parents. For he firmly determined to act as intercessor in
this case, and to forward a happy and lawful union between the lovers.
He begged permission of the Amtmann to speak in private with Melina, a request
which was granted without difficulty.

CHAPTER XIV.
The conversation of these new acquaintances very soon grew confidential and lively.
When Wilhelm told the downcast youth of his connection with the lady's parents, and
offered to mediate in the affair, showing at the same time the strongest expectation of
success, a light was shed across the dreary and anxious mind of the prisoner: he felt
himself already free, already reconciled with the parents of his bride, and now began
to speak about his future occupation and support.
"On this point," said our friend, "you cannot long be in difficulty; for you seem to me
directed, not more by your circumstances than by nature, to make your fortune in the
noble profession you have chosen. A pleasing figure, a sonorous voice, a feeling heart!
Could an actor be better furnished? If I can serve you with a few introductions, it will
give me the greatest pleasure."
"I thank you with all my heart," replied the other, "but I shall hardly be able to make
use of them; for it is my purpose, if possible, not to return to the stage."
"Here you are certainly to blame," said Wilhelm, after a pause, during which he had
partly recovered out of his astonishment; for it had never once entered his head, but
that the player, the moment his young wife and he were out of durance, would repair
to some theatre. It seemed to him as natural and as necessary as for the frog to seek
pools of water. He had not doubted of it for a moment, and he now heard the contrary
with boundless surprise.
"Yes," replied Melina, "I have it in view not to re-appear upon the stage, but rather to
take up some civil calling, be it what it will, so that I can but obtain one."
"This is a strange resolution, which I cannot give my approbation to. Without especial
reasons, it can never be advisable to change the mode of life we have begun with; and,
besides, I know of no condition that presents so much allurement, so many charming
prospects, as the condition of an actor."
"It is easy to see that you have never been one," said the other.
"Alas, sir," answered Wilhelm, "how seldom is any man contented with the station
where he happens to be placed! He is ever coveting that of his neighbor, from which
the neighbor in his turn is longing to be free."

"Yet still there is a difference," said Melina, "between bad and worse. Experience, not
impatience, makes me determine as you see. Is there in the world any creature whose
morsel of bread is attended with such vexation, uncertainty, and toil? It were almost as
good to take the staff and wallet, and beg from door to door. What things to be
endured from the envy of rivals, from the partiality of managers, from the everaltering caprices of the public! In truth, one would need to have a hide like a bear's,
that is led about in a chain along with apes, and dogs of knowledge, and cudgelled into
dancing at the sound of a bagpipe before the populace and children."
Wilhelm thought a thousand things, which he would not vex the worthy man by
uttering. He merely, therefore, led the conversation round them at a distance. His
friend explained himself the more candidly and circumstantially on that account. "Is
not the manager obliged," said he, "to fall down at the feet of every little Stadtrath,
that he may get permission, for a month between the fairs, to cause
another groschen or two to circulate in the place? Ours, on the whole, a worthy man, I
have often pitied; though at other times he gave me cause enough for discontentment.
A good actor drains him by extortion; of the bad he cannot rid himself; and, should he
try to make his income at all equal to his outlay, the public immediately takes
umbrage, the house stands empty; and, not to go to wreck entirely, he must continue
acting in the midst of sorrow and vexation. No, no, sir! Since you are so good as to
undertake to help me, have the kindness, I entreat you, to plead with the parents of
my bride: let them get me a little post of clerk or collector, and I shall think myself well
dealt with."
After exchanging a few words more, Wilhelm went away with the promise to visit the
parents early in the morning, and see what could be done. Scarcely was he by himself,
when he gave utterance to his thoughts in these exclamations: "Unhappy Melina! not
in thy condition, but in thyself, lies the mean impediment over which thou canst not
gain the mastery. What mortal in the world, if without inward calling he take up a
trade, an art, or any mode of life, will not feel his situation miserable? But he who is
born with capacities for any undertaking, finds in executing this the fairest portion of
his being. Nothing upon earth without its difficulties! It is the secret impulse within, it
is the love and the delight we feel, that help us to conquer obstacles, to clear out new
paths, and to overleap the bounds of that narrow circle in which others poorly toil.
For thee the stage is but a few boards: the parts assigned thee are but what a task is to

a school-boy. The spectators thou regardest as on work-days they regard each other.
For thee, then, it may be well to wish thyself behind a desk, over ruled ledgers,
collecting tolls, and picking out reversions. Thou feelest not the co-operating, coinspiring whole, which the mind alone can invent, comprehend, and complete: thou
feelest not that in man there lives a spark of purer fire, which, when it is not fed, when
it is not fanned, gets covered by the ashes of indifference and daily wants, yet not till
late, perhaps never, can be altogether quenched. Thou feelest in thy soul no strength
to fan this spark into a flame, no riches in thy heart to feed it when aroused. Hunger
drives thee on, inconveniences withstand thee; and it is hidden from thee, that, in
every human condition, foes lie in wait for us, invincible except by cheerfulness and
equanimity. Thou dost well to wish thyself within the limits of a common station, for
what station that required soul and resolution couldst thou rightly fill? Give a soldier, a
statesman, a divine, thy sentiments, and as justly will he fret himself about the
miseries of his condition. Nay, have there not been men so totally forsaken by all
feeling of existence, that they have held the life and nature of mortals as a nothing, a
painful, short, and tarnished gleam of being? Did the forms of active men rise up living
in thy soul; were thy breast warmed by a sympathetic fire; did the vocation which
proceeds from within diffuse itself over all thy frame; were the tones of thy voice, the
words of thy mouth, delightful to hear; didst thou feel thy own being sufficient for
thyself,—then wouldst thou doubtless seek place and opportunity likewise to feel it in
others."
Amid such words and thoughts, our friend undressed himself, and went to bed, with
feelings of the deepest satisfaction. A whole romance of what he now hoped to do,
instead of the worthless occupations which should have filled the approaching day,
arose within his mind: pleasant fantasies softly conducted him into the kingdom of
sleep, and then gave him up to their sisters, sweet dreams, who received him with
open arms, and encircled his reposing head with the images of heaven.
Early in the morning he was awake again, and thinking of the business that lay before
him. He revisited the house of the forsaken family, where his presence caused no small
surprise. He introduced his proposal in the most prudent manner, and soon found both
more and fewer difficulties than he had anticipated. For one thing, the evil was
already done: and though people of a singularly strict and harsh temper are wont to
set themselves forcibly against the past, and thus to increase the evil that cannot now
be remedied; yet, on the other hand, what is actually done exerts an irresistible effect
upon most minds: an event which lately appeared impossible takes its place, so soon

as it has really occurred, with what occurs daily. It was accordingly soon settled, that
Herr Melina was to wed the daughter; who, however, in return, because of her
misconduct, was to take no marriage-portion with her, and to promise that she would
leave her aunt's legacy, for a few years more, at an easy interest, in her father's hands.
But the second point, touching a civil provision for Melina, was attended with greater
difficulties. They liked not to have the luckless pair continually living in their sight: they
would not have a present object ever calling to their minds the connection of a mean
vagabond with so respectable a family,—a family which could number even a
superintendent among its relatives; nay, it was not to be looked for, that the
government would trust him with a charge. Both parents were alike inflexible in this
matter; and Wilhelm, who pleaded very hard, unwilling that a man whom he
contemned should return to the stage, and convinced that he deserved not such a
happiness, could not, with all his rhetoric, produce the slenderest impression. Had he
known the secret springs of the business, he would have spared himself the labor of
attempting to persuade. The father would gladly have kept his daughter near him; but
he hated the young man, because his wife herself had cast an eye upon him: while the
latter could not bear to have, in her step-daughter, a happy rival constantly before her
eyes. So Melina with his young wife, who already manifested no dislike to go and see
the world, and be seen of it, was obliged, against his will, to set forth in a few days, and
seek some place in any acting company where he could find one.

CHAPTER XV.
Happy season of youth! Happy times of the first wish of love! A man is then like a child
that can for hours delight itself with an echo, can support alone the charges of
conversation, and be well contented with its entertainment if the unseen interlocutor
will but repeat the concluding syllables of the words addressed to it.
So was it with Wilhelm in the earlier and still more in the later period of his passion for
Mariana; he transferred the whole wealth of his own emotions to her, and looked
upon himself as a beggar that lived upon her alms: and as a landscape is more
delightful, nay, is delightful only, when it is enlightened by the sun; so likewise in his
eyes were all things beautified and glorified which lay round her or related to her.
Often would he stand in the theatre behind the scenes, to which he had obtained the
freedom of access from the manager. In such cases, it is true, the perspective magic
was away; but the far mightier sorcery of love then first began to act. For hours he
could stand by the sooty light-frame, inhaling the vapor of tallow lamps, looking out at
his mistress; and when she returned, and cast a kindly glance upon him, he could feel
himself lost in ecstasy: and, though close upon laths and bare spars, he seemed
transported into paradise. The stuffed bunches of wool denominated lambs, the
waterfalls of tin, the paper roses, and the one-sided huts of straw, awoke in him fair
poetic visions of an old pastoral world. Nay, the very dancing-girls, ugly as they were
when seen at hand, did not always inspire him with disgust: they trod the same floor
with Mariana. So true is it, that love, which alone can give their full charm to rosebowers, myrtle-groves, and moonshine, can also communicate, even to shavings of
wood, and paper-clippings, the aspect of animated nature. It is so strong a spice, that
tasteless or even nauseous soups are by it rendered palatable.
So potent a spice was certainly required to render tolerable, nay, at last agreeable, the
state in which he usually found her chamber, not to say herself.
Brought up in a substantial burgher's house, cleanliness and order were the elements
in which he breathed; and, inheriting as he did a portion of his father's taste for finery,
it had always been his care, in boyhood, to furbish up his chamber, which he regarded
as his little kingdom, in the stateliest fashion. His bed-curtains were drawn together in
large, massy folds, and fastened with tassels, as they are usually seen in thrones; he
had got himself a carpet for the middle of his chamber, and a finer one for his table;
his books and apparatus he had, almost instinctively, arranged in such a manner, that a

Dutch painter might have imitated them for groups in his still-life scenes. He had a
white cap, which he wore straight up like a turban; and the sleeves of his night-gown
he had caused to be cut short, in the mode of the Orientals. By way of reason for this,
he pretended that long, wide sleeves encumbered him in writing. When, at night, the
boy was quite alone, and no longer dreaded any interruption, he usually wore a silk
sash tied round his body; and often, it is said, he would fix in his girdle a sword, which
he had appropriated from an old armory, and thus repeat and declaim his tragic parts;
nay, in the same trim he would kneel down and say his evening prayer.
In those times, how happy did he think the players, whom he saw possessed of so
many splendid garments, trappings, and arms; and in the constant practice of a lofty
demeanor, the spirit of which seemed to hold up a mirror of whatever, in the opinions,
relations, and passions of men, was stateliest and most magnificent. Of a piece with
this, thought Wilhelm, is also the player's domestic life,—a series of dignified
transactions and employments, whereof their appearance on the stage is but the
outmost portion; like as a mass of silver, long simmering about in the purifying
furnace, at length gleams with a bright and beautiful tinge in the eye of the refiner,
and shows him, at the same time, that the metal now is cleansed of all foreign mixture.
Great, accordingly, was his surprise at first, when he found himself beside his mistress,
and looked down, through the cloud that environed him, on tables, stools, and floor.
The wrecks of a transient, light, and false decoration lay, like the glittering coat of a
skinned fish, dispersed in wild disorder. The implements of personal cleanliness,—
combs, soap, towels,—with the traces of their use, were not concealed. Music,
portions of plays and pairs of shoes, washes and Italian flowers, pin-cushions, hairskewers, rouge-pots, and ribbons, books and straw hats,—no article despised the
neighborhood of another: all were united by a common element,— powder and dust.
Yet as Wilhelm scarcely noticed in her presence aught except herself; nay, as all that
had belonged to her, that she had touched, was dear to him,—he came at last to feel,
in this chaotic housekeeping, a charm which the proud pomp of his own habitation
never had communicated. When, on this hand, he lifted aside her bodice, to get at the
harpsichord; on that, threw her gown upon the bed, that he might find a seat; when
she herself, with careless freedom, did not seek to hide from him many a natural
office, which, out of respect for the presence of a second person, is usually
concealed,—he felt as if by all this he was coming nearer to her every moment, as if
the communion betwixt them was fastening by invisible ties.

It was not so easy to reconcile with his previous ideas the behavior of the other
players, whom, on his first visits, he often met with in her house. Ever busied in being
idle, they seemed to think least of all on their employment and object: the poetic
worth of a piece they were never heard to speak of, or to judge of, right or wrong;
their continual question was simply, How much will it bring? Is it a stock-piece? How
long will it run? How often think you it may be played? and other inquiries and
observations of the same description. Then commonly they broke out against the
manager, that he was stinted with his salaries, and especially unjust to this one or to
that; then against the public, how seldom it recompensed the right man with its
approval, how the German theatre was daily improving, how the player was ever
growing more honored, and never could be honored enough. Then they would descant
largely about wine-gardens and coffee-houses; how much debt one of their comrades
had contracted, and must suffer a deduction from his wages on account of; about the
disproportion of their weekly salaries; about the cabals of some rival company: on
which occasions, they would pass again to the great and merited attention which the
public now bestowed upon them; not forgetting the importance of the theatre to the
improvement of the nation and the world.
All this, which had already given Wilhelm many a restless hour, came again into his
memory, as he walked his horse slowly homewards, and contemplated the various
occurrences in which he had so lately been engaged. The commotion produced by a
girl's elopement, not only in a decent family, but in a whole town, he had seen with his
own eyes; the scenes upon the highway and in the Amthaus, the views entertained by
Melina, and whatever else he had witnessed, again arose before him, and brought his
keen, forecasting mind into a sort of anxious disquietude; which no longer to endure,
he struck the spurs into his horse, and hastened towards home.
By this expedient, however, he but ran to meet new vexations. Werner, his friend and
future brother-in-law, was waiting for him, to begin a serious, important, unexpected
conversation.
Werner was one of those tried, sedate persons, with fixed principles and habits, whom
we usually denominate cold characters, because on emergencies they do not burst
forth quickly or very visibly. Accordingly, his intercourse with Wilhelm was a perpetual
contest; which, however, only served to knit their mutual affection the more firmly;
for, notwithstanding their very opposite modes of thinking, each found his account in
communicating with the other. Werner was very well contented with himself, that he

could now and then lay a bridle on the exalted but commonly extravagant spirit of his
friend; and Wilhelm often felt a glorious triumph, when the staid and thinking Werner
could be hurried on with him in warm ebullience. Thus each exercised himself upon
the other; they had been accustomed to see each other daily; and you would have
said, their eagerness to meet and talk together had even been augmented by the
inability of each to understand the other. At bottom, however, being both goodhearted men, they were both travelling together towards one goal; and they could
never understand how it was that neither of the two could bring the other over to his
own persuasion.
For some time Werner had observed that Wilhelm's visits had been rarer; that in his
favorite discussions he was brief and absent-minded; that he no longer abandoned
himself to the vivid depicting of singular conceptions,—tokens by which, in truth, a
mind getting rest and contentment in the presence of a friend is most clearly
indicated. The considerate and punctual Werner first sought for the root of the evil in
his own conduct; till some rumors of the neighborhood set him on the proper trace,
and some unguarded proceedings on the part of Wilhelm brought him nearer to the
certainty. He began his investigation, and erelong discovered, that for some time
Wilhelm had been openly visiting an actress, had often spoken with her at the theatre,
and accompanied her home. On discovering the nightly visits of his friend, Werner's
anxiety increased to a painful extent: for he heard that Mariana was a most seductive
girl, who probably was draining the youth of his money; while, at the same time, she
herself was supported by another and a very worthless lover.
Having pushed his suspicions as near certainty as possible, he had resolved to make a
sharp attack on Wilhelm: he was now in full readiness with all his preparations, when
his friend returned, discontented and unsettled, from his journey.
That very evening Werner laid the whole of what he knew before him, first calmly,
then with the emphatic earnestness of a well-meaning friendship. He left no point of
the subject undiscussed, and made Wilhelm taste abundance of those bitter things
which men at ease are accustomed, with virtuous spite, to dispense so liberally to men
in love. Yet, as might have been expected, he accomplished little. Wilhelm answered
with interior commotion, though with great confidence, "You know not the girl!
Appearances, perhaps, are not to her advantage; but I am certain of her faithfulness
and virtue, as of my love."

Werner maintained his accusations, and offered to bring proofs and witnesses.
Wilhelm waived these offers, and parted with his friend out of humor and unhinged,
like a man in whose jaw some unskilful dentist has been seizing a diseased, yet fastrooted, tooth, and tugging at it harshly to no purpose.
It exceedingly dissatisfied Wilhelm to see the fair image of Mariana overclouded and
almost deformed in his soul, first by the capricious fancies of his journey, and then by
the unfriendliness of Werner. He adopted the surest means of restoring it to complete
brilliancy and beauty, by setting out at night, and hastening to his wonted destination.
She received him with extreme joy: on entering the town, he had ridden past her
window; she had been expecting his company; and it is easy to conceive that all
scruples were soon driven from his heart. Nay, her tenderness again opened up the
whole stores of his confidence; and he told her how deeply the public, how deeply his
friend, had sinned against her.
Much lively talking led them at length to speak about the earliest period of their
acquaintance, the recollection of which forms always one of the most delightful topics
between two lovers. The first steps that introduce us to the enchanted garden of love
are so full of pleasure, the first prospects so charming, that every one is willing to recall
them to his memory. Each party seeks a preference above the other; each has loved
sooner, more devotedly; and each, in this contest, would rather be conquered than
conquer.
Wilhelm repeated to his mistress, what he had so often told her before, how she soon
abstracted his attention from the play, and fixed it on herself; how her form, her
acting, her voice, inspired him; how at last he went only on the nights when she was to
appear; how, in fine, having ventured behind the scenes, he had often stood by her
unheeded; and he spoke with rapture of the happy evening when he found an
opportunity to do her some civility, and lead her into conversation.
Mariana, on the other hand, would not allow that she had failed so long to notice him:
she declared that she had seen him in the public walk, and for proof she described the
clothes which he wore on that occasion; she affirmed that even then he pleased her
before all others, and made her long for his acquaintance.
How gladly did Wilhelm credit all this! How gladly did he catch at the persuasion, that,
when he used to approach her, she had felt herself drawn towards him by some
resistless influence; that she had gone with him between the side-scenes on purpose

to see him more closely, and get acquainted with him; and that, in fine, when his
backwardness and modesty were not to be conquered, she had herself afforded him
an opportunity, and, as it were, compelled him to hand her a glass of lemonade.
In this affectionate contest, which they pursued through all the little circumstances of
their brief romance, the hours passed rapidly away; and Wilhelm left his mistress with
his heart at peace, and firmly determined on proceeding forthwith to the execution of
his project.

CHAPTER XVI.
The necessary preparations for his journey his father and mother had attended to:
some little matters, that were yet wanting to his equipage, delayed his departure for a
few days. Wilhelm took advantage of this opportunity to write to Mariana, meaning
thus to bring to a decision the proposal, about which she had hitherto avoided
speaking with him. The letter was as follows:—
"Under the kind veil of night, which has often over-shadowed us together, I sit and
think, and write to thee: all that I meditate and do is solely on thy account. O Mariana!
with me, the happiest of men, it is as with a bridegroom who stands in the festive
chamber, dreaming of the new universe that is to be unfolded to him, and by means of
him, and, while the holy ceremonies are proceeding, transports himself in longing
thought before the mysterious curtains, from which the loveliness of love whispers out
to him.
"I have constrained myself not to see thee for a few days: the sacrifice was easy, when
united with the hope of such a recompense, of being always with thee, of remaining
ever thine! Need I repeat what I desire? I must! for it seems as if yet thou hadst never
understood me.
"How often, in the low tones of true love, which, though wishing to gain all, dares
speak but little, have I sought in thy heart for the desire of a perpetual union. Thou
hast understood me, doubtless; for in thy own heart the same wish must have arisen:
thou didst comprehend me, in that kiss, in the intoxicating peace of that happy
evening. Thy silence testified to me thy modest honor; and how did it increase my
love! Another woman would have had recourse to artifice, that she might ripen by
superfluous sunshine the purpose of her lover's heart, might elicit a proposal, and
secure a firm promise. Mariana, on the contrary, drew back: she repelled the halfopened confidence of him she loved, and sought to conceal her approving feelings by
apparent indifference. But I have understood thee! What a miserable creature must I
be, if I did not by these tokens recognize the pure and generous love that cares not for
itself, but for its object! Confide in me, and fear nothing. We belong to one another;
and neither of us leaves aught or forsakes aught, if we live for one another.
"Take it, then, this hand! Solemnly I offer this unnecessary pledge! All the joys of love
we have already felt, but there is a new blessedness in the firm thought of duration.

Ask not how,—care not. Fate takes care of love, and the more certainly as love is easy
to provide for.
"My heart has long ago forsaken my paternal home: it is with thee, as my spirit hovers
on the stage. O my darling! to what other man has it been given to unite all his wishes,
as it is to me? No sleep falls upon my eyes: like the redness of an everlasting dawn, thy
love and thy happiness still glow around me.
"Scarcely can I hold myself from springing up, from rushing forth to thee, and forcing
thy consent, and, with the first light of to-morrow, pressing forward into the world for
the mark I aim at. But, no! I will restrain myself; I will not act like a thoughtless fool,
will do nothing rashly: my plan is laid, and I will execute it calmly.
"I am acquainted with the manager Serlo: my journey leads me directly to the place
where he is. For above a year he has frequently been wishing that his people had a
touch of my vivacity, and my delight in theatrical affairs: I shall doubtless be very kindly
received. Into your company I cannot enter, for more than one reason. Serlo's theatre,
moreover, is at such a distance from this, that I may there begin my undertaking
without any apprehension of discovery. With him I shall thus at once find a tolerable
maintenance: I shall look about me in the public, get acquainted with the company,
and then come back for thee.
"Mariana, thou seest what I can force myself to do, that I may certainly obtain thee.
For such a period not to see thee; for such a period to know thee in the wide world! I
dare not view it closely. But yet if I recall to memory thy love, which assures me of all;
if thou shalt not disdain my prayer, and give me, ere we part, thy hand, before the
priest,—I may then depart in peace. It is but a form between us, yet a form so
touching,—the blessing of Heaven to the blessing of the earth. Close by thy house, in
the Ritterschaftliche Chapel, the ceremony will be soon and secretly performed.
"For the beginning I have gold enough; we will share it between us; it will suffice for
both; and, before that is finished, Heaven will send us more.
"No, my darling, I am not downcast about the issue. What is begun with so much
cheerfulness must reach a happy end. I have never doubted that a man may force his
way through the world, if he really is in earnest about it; and I feel strength enough
within me to provide a liberal support for two, and many more. The world, we are
often told, is unthankful: I have never yet discovered that it was unthankful, if one

knew how, in the proper way, to do it service. My whole soul burns at the idea,
that I shall at length step forth, and speak to the hearts of men something they have
long been yearning to hear. How many thousand times has a feeling of disgust passed
through me, alive as I am to the nobleness of the stage, when I have seen the poorest
creatures fancying they could speak a word of power to the hearts of the people!
The tone of a man's voice singing treble sounds far pleasanter and purer to my ear: it is
incredible how these blockheads, in their coarse ineptitude, deform things beautiful
and venerable.
"The theatre has often been at variance with the pulpit: they ought not, I think, to
quarrel. How much is it to be wished, that in both the celebration of nature and of God
were intrusted to none but men of noble minds! These are no dreams, my darling! As I
have felt in thy heart that thou couldst love, I seize the dazzling thought, and say,—no,
I will not say, but I will hope and trust,—that we two shall yet appear to men as a pair
of chosen spirits, to unlock their hearts, to touch the recesses of their nature, and
prepare for them celestial joys, as surely as the joys I have tasted with thee deserved
to be named celestial, since they drew us from ourselves, and exalted us above
ourselves.
"I cannot end. I have already said too much, and know not whether I have yet said all,
all that concerns thy interests; for to express the agitations of the vortex that whirls
round within myself, is beyond the power of words.
"Yet take this sheet, my love! I have again read it over: I observe it ought to have
begun more cautiously; but it contains in it all that thou hast need to know,—enough
to prepare thee for the hour when I shall return with the lightness of love to thy
bosom. I seem to myself like a prisoner that is secretly filing his irons asunder. I bid
good-night to my soundly sleeping parents. Farewell, my beloved, farewell! For this
time I conclude; my eyelids have more than once dropped together; it is now deep in
the night."

CHAPTER XVII.
It seemed as if the day would never end, while Wilhelm, with the letter beautifully
folded in his pocket, longed to meet with Mariana. The darkness had scarcely come on,
when, contrary to custom, he glided forth to her house. His plan was, to announce
himself for the night; then to quit his mistress for a short time, leaving the letter with
her ere he went away; and, returning at a late hour, to obtain her reply, her consent,
or to force it from her by the power of his caresses. He flew into her arms, and pressed
her in rapture to his bosom. The vehemence of his emotions prevented him at first
from noticing, that, on this occasion, she did not receive him with her wonted
heartiness; yet she could not long conceal her painful situation, but imputed it to slight
indisposition. She complained of a headache, and would not by any means consent to
his proposal of coming back that night. Suspecting nothing wrong, he ceased to urge
her, but felt that this was not the moment for delivering his letter. He retained it,
therefore; and, as several of her movements and observations courteously compelled
him to take his leave, in the tumult of unsatiable love he snatched up one of her
neckerchiefs, squeezed it into his pocket, and forced himself away from her lips and
her door. He returned home, but could not rest there: he again dressed himself, and
went out into the open air.
After walking up and down several streets, he was accosted by a stranger inquiring for
a certain inn. Wilhelm offered to conduct him to the house. In the way, his new
acquaintance asked about the names of the streets, the owners of various extensive
edifices, then about some police regulations of the town; so that, by the time they
reached the door of the inn, they had fallen into quite an interesting conversation. The
stranger politely compelled his guide to enter, and drink a glass of punch with him. Ere
long he had told his name and place of abode, as well as the business that had brought
him hither; and he seemed to expect a like confidence from Wilhelm. Our friend,
without any hesitation, mentioned his name, and the place where he lived.
"Are you not a grandson of the old Meister, who possessed that beautiful collection of
pictures and statues?" inquired the stranger.
"Yes, I am. I was ten years old when my grandfather died, and it grieved me very much
to see these fine things sold."
"Your father got a fine sum of money for them."

"You know of it, then?"
"Yes, indeed: I saw that treasure ere it left your house. Your grandfather was not
merely a collector, he had a thorough knowledge of art. In his younger happy years he
had been in Italy, and had brought back with him such treasures as could not now be
got for any price. He possessed some exquisite pictures by the best masters. When you
looked through his drawings, you would scarcely have believed your eyes. Among his
marbles were some invaluable fragments; his series of bronzes was instructive and
well chosen; he had also collected medals, in considerable quantity, relating to history
and art; his few gems deserved the greatest praise. In addition to all which, the whole
was tastefully arranged; although the rooms and hall of the old house had not been
symmetrically built."
"You may conceive," said Wilhelm, "what we young ones lost, when all these articles
were taken down and sent away. It was the first mournful period of my life. I cannot
tell you how empty the chambers looked when we saw those objects vanish one by
one, which had amused us from our earliest years, and which we considered as
unalterable as the house, or the town itself."
"If I mistake not, your father put the capital produced by the sale into some neighbor's
stock, with whom he commenced a sort of partnership in trade."
"Quite right; and their joint speculations have prospered in their hands. Within the last
twelve years, they have greatly increased their fortunes, and are now the more
vehemently bent on gaining. Old Werner also has a son, who suits that sort of
occupation much better than I."
"I am sorry the place should have lost such an ornament as your grandfather's cabinet
was to it. I saw it but a short time prior to the sale; and I may say, I was myself the
cause of its being then disposed of. A rich nobleman, a great amateur, but one who, in
such important transactions, does not trust to his own solitary judgment, had sent me
hither, and requested my advice. For six days I examined the collection: on the
seventh, I advised my friend to pay down the required sum without delay. You were
then a lively boy, often running about me: you explained to me the subjects of the
pictures, and in general, I recollect, could give a very good account of the whole
cabinet."
"I remember such a person, but I should not have recognized him in you."

"It is a good while ago, and we all change more or less. You had, if I mistake not, a
favorite piece among them, to which you were ever calling my attention."
"Oh, yes! it represented the history of that king's son dying of a secret love for his
father's bride."
"It was not, certainly, the best picture,—badly grouped, of no superiority in coloring,
and executed altogether with great mannerism."
"This I did not understand, and do not yet: it is the subject that charms me in a picture,
not the art."
"Your grandfather seemed to have thought otherwise. The greater part of his
collection consisted of excellent pieces; in which, represent what they might, one
constantly admired the talent of the master. This picture of yours had accordingly been
hung in the outermost room,—a proof that he valued it slightly."
"It was in that room where we young ones used to play, and where the piece you
mention made on me a deep impression; which not even your criticism, greatly as I
honor it, could obliterate, if we stood before the picture at this moment. What a
melancholy object is a youth that must shut up within himself the sweet impulse, the
fairest inheritance which nature has given us, and conceal in his own bosom the fire
which should warm and animate himself and others, so that his vitals are wasted away
by unutterable pains! I feel a pity for the ill-fated man that would consecrate himself
to another, when the heart of that other has already found a worthy object of true and
pure affection."
"Such feelings are, however, very foreign to the principles by which a lover of art
examines the works of great painters; and most probably you, too, had the cabinet
continued in your family, would have by and by acquired a relish for the works
themselves, and have learned to see in the performances of art something more than
yourself and your individual inclinations."
"In truth, the sale of that cabinet grieved me very much at the time; and often since I
have thought of it with regret: but when I consider that it was a necessary means of
awakening a taste in me, of developing a talent, which will operate far more
powerfully on my history than ever those lifeless pictures could have done, I easily

content myself, and honor destiny, which knows how to bring about what is best for
me, and what is best for every one."
"It gives me pain to hear this word destiny in the mouth of a young person, just at the
age when men are commonly accustomed to ascribe their own violent inclinations to
the will of higher natures."
"You, then, do not believe in destiny? No power that rules over us and directs all for
our ultimate advantage?"
"The question is not now of my belief, nor is this the place to explain how I may have
attempted to form for myself some not impossible conception of things which are
incomprehensible to all of us: the question here is, What mode of viewing them will
profit us the most? The fabric of our life is formed of necessity and chance: the reason
of man takes its station between them, and may rule them both; it treats the
necessary as the groundwork of its being; the accidental it can direct and guide, and
employ for its own purposes: and only while this principle of reason stands firm and
inexpugnable, does man deserve to be named the god of this lower world. But woe to
him who, from his youth, has used himself to search in necessity for something of
arbitrary will; to ascribe to chance a sort of reason, which it is a matter of religion to
obey. Is conduct like this aught else than to renounce one's understanding, and give
unrestricted scope to one's inclinations? We think it is a kind of piety to move along
without consideration; to let accidents that please us determine our conduct; and,
finally, to bestow on the result of such a vacillating life the name of providential
guidance."
"Was it never your case that some little circumstance induced you to strike into a
certain path, where some accidental occurrence erelong met you, and a series of
unexpected incidents at length brought you to some point which you yourself had
scarcely once contemplated? Should not lessons of this kind teach us obedience to
destiny, confidence in some such guide?"
"With opinions like these, no woman could maintain her virtue, no man keep the
money in his purse; for occasions enough are occurring to get rid of both. He alone is
worthy of respect, who knows what is of use to himself and others, and who labors to
control his self-will. Each man has his own fortune in his hands; as the artist has a piece
of rude matter, which he is to fashion to a certain shape. But the art of living rightly is

like all arts: the capacity alone is born with us; it must be learned, and practised with
incessant care."
These discussions our two speculators carried on between them to considerable
length: at last they parted without seeming to have wrought any special conviction in
each other, but engaging to meet at an appointed place next day.
Wilhelm walked up and down the streets for a time: he heard a sound of clarinets,
hunting-horns, and bassoons; it swelled his bosom with delightful feelings. It was some
travelling showmen that produced this pleasant music. He spoke with them: for a piece
of coin they followed him to Mariana's house. The space in front of the door was
adorned with lofty trees; under them he placed his artists; and, himself resting on a
bench at some distance, he surrendered his mind without restraint to the hovering
tones which floated round him in the cool mellow night. Stretched out beneath the
kind stars, he felt his existence like a golden dream. "She, too, hears these flutes," said
he within his heart: "she feels whose remembrance, whose love of her, it is that makes
the night full of music. In distance, even, we are united by these melodies, as in every
separation, by the ethereal accordance of love. Ah! two hearts that love each other are
as two magnetic needles: whatever moves the one must move the other with it; for it
is one power that works in both, one principle that pervades them. Can I in her arms
conceive the possibility of parting from her? And yet I am soon to be far from her, to
seek out a sanctuary for our love, and then to have her ever with me.
"How often, when absent from her, and lost in thoughts about her, happening to touch
a book, a piece of dress or aught else, have I thought I felt her hand, so entirely was I
invested with her presence! And to recollect those moments which shunned the light
of day and the eye of the cold spectator; which, to enjoy, the gods might determine to
forsake the painless condition of their pure blessedness! To recollect them! As if by
memory we could renew the tumultuous thrilling of that cup of joy, which encircles
our senses with celestial bonds, and lifts them beyond all earthly hinderances. And her
form"—He lost himself in thoughts of her; his rest passed away into longing; he leaned
against a tree, and cooled his warm cheek on its bark; and the winds of the night
wafted speedily aside the breath, which proceeded in sighs from his pure and
impassioned bosom. He groped for the neckerchief he had taken from her; but it was
forgotten, it lay in his other clothes. His frame quivered with emotion.
The music ceased, and he felt as if fallen from the element in which his thoughts had
hitherto been soaring. His restlessness increased, as his feelings were no longer

nourished and assuaged by the melody. He sat down upon her threshold, and felt
more peace. He kissed the brass knocker of her door: he kissed the threshold over
which her feet went out and in, and warmed it by the fire of his breast. He again sat
still for a moment, and figured her behind her curtains in the white night-gown, with
the red ribbon round her head, in sweet repose: he almost fancied that he was himself
so near her, she must needs be dreaming of him. His thoughts were beautiful, like the
spirits of the twilight; rest and desire alternated within him; love ran with a quivering
hand, in a thousand moods, over all the chords of his soul; it was as if the spheres
stood mute above him, suspending their eternal song to watch the low melodies of his
heart.
Had he then had about him the master-key with which he used to open Mariana's
door, he could not have restrained himself from penetrating into the sanctuary of love.
Yet he went away slowly; he slanted, half-dreaming, in beneath the trees, set himself
for home, and constantly turned round again; at last, with an effort, he constrained
himself, and actually departed. At the corner of the street, looking back yet once, he
imagined that he saw Mariana's door open, and a dark figure issue from it. He was too
distant for seeing clearly; and, before he could exert himself and look sharply, the
appearance was already lost in the night; yet afar off he thought he saw it again gliding
past a white house. He stood, and strained his eyes; but, ere he could arouse himself
and follow the phantom, it had vanished. Whither should he pursue it? What street
had the man taken, if it were a man?
A nightly traveller, when at some turn of his path he has seen the country for an
instant illuminated by a flash of lightning, will, with dazzled eyes, next moment, seek in
vain for the preceding forms and the connection of his road; so was it in the eyes and
the heart of Wilhelm. And as a spirit of midnight, which awakens unutterable terror, is,
in the succeeding moments of composure, regarded as a child of imagination, and the
fearful vision leaves doubts without end behind it in the soul; so likewise was Wilhelm
in extreme disquietude, as, leaning on the corner-stone of the street, he heeded not
the clear gray of the morning, and the crowing of the cocks; till the early trades began
to stir, and drove him home.
On his way, he had almost effaced the unexpected delusion from his mind by the most
sufficient reasons; yet the fine harmonious feelings of the night, on which he now
looked back as if they too had been a vision, were also gone. To soothe his heart, and
put the last seal on his returning belief, he took the neckerchief from the pocket of the

dress he had been last wearing. The rustling of a letter which fell out of it took the
kerchief away from his lips: he lifted and read,—
"As I love thee, little fool, what ailed thee last night? This evening I will come again. I
can easily suppose that thou art sick of staying here so long: but have patience; at the
fair I will return for thee. And observe, never more put me on that abominable blackgreen-brown jacket: thou lookest in it like the witch of Endor. Did I not send the white
night-gown, that I might have a snowy little lambkin in my arms? Send thy letters
always by the ancient sibyl: the Devil himself has selected her as Iris."

BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
Whoever strives in our sight with vehement force to reach an object, be it one that we
praise or that we blame, may count on exciting an interest in our minds; but, when
once the matter is decided, we turn our eyes away from him: whatever once lies
finished and done, can no longer at all fix our attention, especially if we at first
prophesied an evil issue to the undertaking.
Therefore we shall not try to entertain our readers with any circumstantial account of
the grief and desperation into which our ill-fated friend was cast, when he saw his
hopes so unexpectedly and instantaneously ruined. On the contrary, we shall even
pass over several years, and again take up our friend, where we hope to find him in
some sort of activity and comfort. First, however, we must shortly set forth a few
matters necessary for maintaining the connection of our narrative.
The pestilence, or a malignant fever, rages with more fierceness, and speedier effect, if
the frame which it attacks was before healthy and full of vigor; and in like manner,
when a luckless, unlooked-for fate overtook the wretched Wilhelm, his whole being in
a moment was laid waste. As when by chance, in the preparation of some artificial
firework, any part of the composition kindles before its time; and the skilfully bored
and loaded barrels, which, arranged, and burning after a settled plan, would have
painted in the air a magnificently varying series of flaming images, now hissing and
roaring, promiscuously explode with a confused and dangerous crash,—so, in our
hero's case, did happiness and hope, pleasure and joys, realities and dreams, clash
together with destructive tumult, all at once in his bosom. In such desolate moments,
the friend that has hastened to deliverance stands fixed in astonishment; and for him
who suffers, it is a benefit that sense forsakes him.
Days of pain, unmixed, ever-returning, and purposely renewed, succeeded next: still,
even these are to be regarded as a grace from nature. In such hours Wilhelm had not
yet quite lost his mistress: his pains were indefatigable struggles, still to hold fast the
happiness that was gliding from his soul; again to luxuriate in thought on the possibility
of it; to procure a brief after-life for his joys that had departed forever. Thus one may
look upon a body as not utterly dead while the putrefaction lasts; while the forces that
in vain seek to work by their old appointment, still labor in dissevering the particles of
that frame which they once animated; and not till all is disunited and inert, till we see

the whole mouldered down into indifferent dust,—not till then does there rise in us
the mournful, vacant sentiment of death,—death, not to be recalled, save by the
breath of Him that lives forever.
In a temper so new, so entire, so full of love, there was much to tear asunder, to
desolate, to kill; and even the healing force of youth gave nourishment and violence to
the power of sorrow. The stroke had extended to the roots of his whole existence.
Werner, by necessity his confidant, attacked the hated passion itself with fire and
sword, resolutely zealous to search into the monster's inmost life. The opportunity was
lucky, the evidence at hand, and many were the histories and narratives with which he
backed it out. With such unrelenting vehemence did he make his advances, leaving his
friend not even the respite of the smallest momentary self-deception, but treading
down every lurking-place in which he might have saved himself from desperation, that
Nature, not inclined to let her darling perish utterly, visited him with sickness, to make
an outlet for him on the other side.
A violent fever, with its train of consequences, medicines, overstraining, and
exhaustion, besides the unwearied attentions of his family, the love of his brothers and
sisters, which first becomes truly sensible in times of distress and want, were so many
fresh occupations to his mind, and thus formed a kind of painful entertainment. It was
not till he grew better, in other words, till his strength was exhausted, that Wilhelm
first looked down with horror into the gloomy abyss of a barren misery, as one looks
down into the hollow crater of an extinguished volcano.
He now bitterly reproached himself, that, after so great a loss, he could yet enjoy one
painless, restful, indifferent moment. He despised his own heart, and longed for the
balm of tears and lamentation.
To awaken these again within him, he would recall to memory the scenes of his bygone happiness. He would paint them to his fancy in the liveliest colors, transport
himself again into the days when they were real; and when standing on the highest
elevation he could reach, when the sunshine of past times again seemed to animate
his limbs and heave his bosom, he would look back into the fearful chasm, would feast
his eye on its dismembering depth, then plunge down into its horrors, and thus force
from nature the bitterest pains. With such repeated cruelty did he tear himself in
pieces; for youth, which is so rich in undeveloped force, knows not what it squanders
when, to the anguish which a loss occasions, it adds so many sorrows of its own
production, as if it meant then first to give the right value to what is gone forever. He

likewise felt so convinced that his present loss was the sole, the first, the last, he ever
could experience in life, that he turned away from every consolation which aimed at
showing that his sorrows might be less than endless.

CHAPTER II.
Accustomed in this way to torment himself, he now also attacked what still remained
to him; what next to love, and along with it, had given him the highest joys and
hopes,—his talent as a poet and actor, with spiteful criticisms on every side. In his
labors he could see nothing but a shallow imitation of prescribed forms, without
intrinsic worth: he looked on them as stiff school-exercises, destitute of any spark of
nature, truth, or inspiration. His poems now appeared nothing more than a
monotonous arrangement of syllables, in which the most trite emotions and thoughts
were dragged along and kept together by a miserable rhyme. And thus did he also
deprive himself of every expectation, every pleasure, which on this quarter at least
might have aided the recovery of his peace.
With his theatric talent it fared no better. He blamed himself for not having sooner
detected the vanity on which alone this pretension had been founded. His figure, his
gait, his movements, his mode of declamation, were severally taxed: he decisively
renounced every species of advantage or merit that might have raised him above the
common run of men, and so doing he increased his mute despair to the highest pitch.
For, if it is hard to give up a woman's love, no less painful is the task to part from the
fellowship of the Muses, to declare ourselves forever undeserving to be of their
community, and to forego the fairest and most immediate kind of approbation, what is
openly bestowed on our person, our voice, and our demeanor.
Thus, then, our friend had long ago entirely resigned himself, and set about devoting
his powers with the greatest zeal to the business of trade. To the surprise of friends,
and to the great contentment of his father, no one was now more diligent than
Wilhelm, on the exchange or in the counting-house, in the sale-room or the
warehouses: correspondence and calculations, all that was intrusted to his charge, he
attended to and managed with the greatest diligence and zeal. Not, in truth, with that
warm diligence which to the busy man is its own reward, when he follows with
constancy and order the employment he was born for, but with the silent diligence of
duty, which has the best principle for its foundation; which is nourished by conviction,
and rewarded by conscience; yet which oft, even when the clearest testimony of our
minds is crowning it with approbation, can scarcely repress a struggling sigh.
In this manner he lived for a time, assiduously busied, and at last persuaded that his
former hard trial had been ordained by fate for the best. He felt glad at having thus
been timefully, though somewhat harshly, warned about the proper path of life; while

many are constrained to expiate more heavily, and at a later age, the misconceptions
into which their youthful inexperience has betrayed them. For each man commonly
defends himself as long as possible from casting out the idols which he worships in his
soul, from acknowledging a master error, and admitting any truth which brings him to
despair.
Determined as he was to abandon his dearest projects, some time was still necessary
to convince him fully of his misfortune. At last, however, he had so completely
succeeded, by irrefragable reasons, in annihilating every hope of love, or poetical
performance, or stage representation, that he took courage to obliterate entirely all
the traces of his folly,—all that could in any way remind him of it. For this purpose he
had lit a fire in his chamber, one cool evening, and brought out a little chest of relics,
among which were multitudes of small articles, that, in memorable moments, he had
begged or stolen from Mariana. Each withered flower brought to his mind the time
when it bloomed fresh among her hair; each little note the happy hour to which it had
invited him; each ribbon-knot the lovely resting-place of his head,—her beautiful
bosom. So occupied, was it not to be expected that each emotion which he thought
long since quite dead, should again begin to move? Was it not to be expected that the
passion over which, when separated from his mistress, he had gained the victory,
should, in the presence of these memorials, again gather strength? We first observe
how dreary and disagreeable an overclouded day is when a single sunbeam pierces
through, and offers to us the exhilarating splendor of a serene hour.
Accordingly, it was not without disturbance that he saw these relics, long preserved as
sacred, fade away from before him in smoke and flame. Sometimes he shuddered and
hesitated in his task: he had still a pearl necklace and a flowered neckerchief in his
hands, when he resolved to quicken the decaying fire with the poetical attempts of his
youth.
Till now he had carefully laid up whatever had proceeded from his pen, since the
earliest unfolding of his mind. His papers yet lay tied up in a bundle at the bottom of
the chest, where he had packed them; purposing to take them with him in his
elopement. How altogether different were his feelings now in opening them, and his
feelings then in tying them together!
If we happen, under certain circumstances, to have written and sealed and despatched
a letter to a friend, which, however, does not find him, but is brought back to us, and
we open it at the distance of some considerable time, a singular emotion is produced

in us, on breaking up our own seal, and conversing with our altered self as with a third
person. A similar and deep feeling seized our friend, as he now opened this packet, and
threw the scattered leaves into the fire; which was flaming fiercely with its offerings,
when Werner entered, expressed his wonder at the blaze, and asked what was the
matter.
"I am now giving proof," said Wilhelm, "that I am serious in abandoning a trade for
which I was not born." And, with these words, he cast the second packet likewise into
the fire. Werner made a motion to prevent him, but the business was already done.
"I cannot see how thou shouldst bring thyself to such extremities," said Werner. "Why
must these labors, because they are not excellent, be annihilated?"
"Because either a poem is excellent, or it should not be allowed to exist. Because each
man who has no gift for producing first-rate works, should entirely abstain from the
pursuit of art, and seriously guard himself against every deception on that subject. For
it must be owned, that in all men there is a certain vague desire to imitate whatever is
presented to them; and such desires do not prove at all that we possess within us the
force necessary for succeeding in these enterprises. Look at boys, how, whenever any
rope-dancers have been visiting the town, they go scrambling up and down, and
balancing on all the planks and beams within their reach, till some other charm calls
them off to other sports, for which perhaps they are as little suited. Hast thou never
marked it in the circle of our friends? No sooner does a dilettante introduce himself to
notice, than numbers of them set themselves to learn playing on his instrument. How
many wander back and forward on this bootless way! Happy they who soon detect the
chasm that lies between their wishes and their powers!"
Werner contradicted this opinion: their discussion became lively, and Wilhelm could
not without emotion employ against his friend the arguments with which he had
already so frequently tormented himself. Werner maintained that it was not
reasonable wholly to relinquish a pursuit for which a man had some propensity and
talent, merely because he never could succeed in it to full perfection. There were
many vacant hours, he said, which might be filled up by it; and then by and by some
result might be produced which would yield a certain satisfaction to himself and
others.
Wilhelm, who in this matter was of quite a different opinion, here interrupted him, and
said with great vivacity,—

"How immensely, dear friend, do you err in believing that a work, the first presentation
of which is to fill the whole soul, can be produced in broken hours scraped together
from other extraneous employment. No: the poet must live wholly for himself, wholly
in the objects that delight him. Heaven has furnished him internally with precious gifts;
he carries in his bosom a treasure that is ever of itself increasing; he must also live with
this treasure, undisturbed from without, in that still blessedness which the rich seek in
vain to purchase with their accumulated stores. Look at men, how they struggle after
happiness and satisfaction! Their wishes, their toil, their gold, are ever hunting
restlessly,—and after what? After that which the poet has received from nature,—the
right enjoyment of the world, the feeling of himself in others, the harmonious
conjunction of many things that will seldom exist together.
"What is it that keeps men in continual discontent and agitation? It is, that they cannot
make realities correspond with their conceptions, that enjoyment steals away from
among their hands, that the wished-for comes too late, and nothing reached and
acquired produces on the heart the effect which their longing for it at a distance led
them to anticipate. Now, fate has exalted the poet above all this, as if he were a god.
He views the conflicting tumult of the passions; sees families and kingdoms raging in
aimless commotion; sees those inexplicable enigmas of misunderstanding, which
frequently a single monosyllable would suffice to explain, occasioning convulsions
unutterably baleful. He has a fellow-feeling of the mournful and the joyful in the fate
of all human beings. When the man of the world is devoting his days to wasting
melancholy, for some deep disappointment, or, in the ebullience of joy, is going out to
meet his happy destiny, the lightly moved and all-conceiving spirit of the poet steps
forth, like the sun from night to day, and with soft transitions tunes his harp to joy or
woe. From his heart, its native soil, springs up the lovely flower of wisdom; and if
others, while waking, dream, and are pained with fantastic delusions from their every
sense, he passes the dream of life like one awake; and the strangest of incidents is to
him a part both of the past and of the future. And thus the poet is at once a teacher, a
prophet, a friend of gods and men. What! thou wouldst have him descend from his
height to some paltry occupation! He who is fashioned like the bird to hover round the
world, to nestle on the lofty summits, to feed on buds and fruits, exchanging gayly one
bough for another, he ought also to work at the plough like an ox; like a dog to train
himself to the harness and draught; or perhaps, tied up in a chain, to guard a farmyard
by his barking!"

Werner, it may well be supposed, had listened with the greatest surprise. "All true," he
rejoined, "if men were but made like birds, and, though they neither spun nor weaved,
could yet spend peaceful days in perpetual enjoyment; if, at the approach of winter,
they could as easily betake themselves to distant regions, could retire before scarcity,
and fortify themselves against frost."
"Poets have lived so," exclaimed Wilhelm, "in times when true nobleness was better
reverenced; and so should they ever live! Sufficiently, provided for within, they had
need of little from without: the gift of communicating lofty emotions and glorious
images to men, in melodies and words that charmed the ear, and fixed themselves
inseparably on whatever objects they referred to, of old enraptured the world, and
served the gifted as a rich inheritance. At the courts of kings, at the tables of the great,
beneath the windows of the fair, the sound of them was heard; while the ear and the
soul were shut for all beside: and men felt as we do when delight comes over us, and
we stop with rapture if, among the dingles we are crossing, the voice of the nightingale
starts out touching and strong. They found a home in every habitation of the world,
and the lowliness of their condition but exalted them the more. The hero listened to
their songs, and the conqueror of the earth did reverence to a poet; for he felt, that,
without poets, his own wild and vast existence would pass away like a whirlwind, and
be forgotten forever. The lover wished that he could feel his longings and his joys so
variedly and so harmoniously as the poet's inspired lips had skill to show them forth;
and even the rich man could not of himself discern such costliness in his idol
grandeurs, as when they were presented to him shining in the splendor of the poet's
spirit, sensible to all worth, and exalting all. Nay, if thou wilt have it, who but the poet
was it that first formed gods for us, that exalted us to them, and brought them down
to us?"
"My friend," said Werner, after some reflection, "it has often grieved me that thou
shouldst strive by force to banish from thy soul what thou feelest so vividly. I am
greatly mistaken, if it were not better for thee in some degree to yield to these
propensities, than to waste thyself by the contradictions of so hard a piece of selfdenial, and with the enjoyment of this one guiltless pleasure to renounce the
enjoyment of all others."
"Shall I confess it," said the other, "and wilt not thou laugh at me if I acknowledge, that
these ideas pursue me constantly; that, let me flee from them as I will, when I explore
my heart, I find all my early wishes yet rooted there, firmly,—nay, more firmly than

ever? Yet what now remains for me, wretched as I am? Ah! whoever should have told
me that the arms of my spirit, with which I was grasping at infinity, and hoping with
certainty to clasp something great and glorious, would so soon be crushed and smote
in pieces,—whoever should have told me this, would have brought me to despair. And
yet now, when judgment has been passed against me; now, when she, that was to be
as my divinity to guide me to my wishes, is gone forever,—what remains but that I
yield up my soul to the bitterest woes? O my brother! I will not deceive you: in my
secret purposes, she was as the hook on which the ladder of my hopes was fixed. See!
With daring aim the mountain adventurer hovers in the air: the iron breaks, and he lies
broken and dismembered on the earth. No, there is no hope, no comfort for me more!
I will not," he cried out, springing to his feet, "leave a single fragment of these
wretched papers from the flames." He then seized one or two packets of them, tore
them up, and threw them into the fire. Werner endeavored to restrain him, but in
vain. "Let me alone!" cried Wilhelm: "what should these miserable leaves do here? To
me they give neither pleasant recollections nor pleasant hopes. Shall they remain
behind to vex me to the end of my life? Shall they perhaps one day serve the world for
a jest, instead of awakening sympathy and horror? Woe to me! my doom is woe! Now
I comprehend the wailings of the poets, of the wretched whom necessity has rendered
wise. How long did I look upon myself as invulnerable and invincible; and, alas! I am
now made to see that a deep and early sorrow can never heal, can never pass away: I
feel that I shall take it with me to my grave. No! not a day of my life shall escape this
anguish, which at last must crush me down; and her image too shall stay with me, shall
live and die with me, the image of the worthless,—O my friend! if I must speak the
feeling of my heart,—the perhaps not altogether worthless! Her situation, the
crookedness of her destiny, have a thousand times excused her in my mind. I have
been too cruel; you steeled me in your own cold unrelenting harshness; you held my
wavering senses captive, and hindered me from doing for myself and her what I owed
to both. Who knows to what a state I may have brought her! my conscience by
degrees presents to me, in all its heaviness, in what helplessness, in what despair, I
may have left her. Was it not possible that she might clear herself? Was it not
possible? How many misconceptions throw the world into perplexity! how many
circumstances may extort forgiveness for the greatest fault! Often do I figure her as
sitting by herself in silence, leaning on her elbows. 'This,' she says, 'is the faith, the
love, he swore to me! With this hard stroke to end the delicious life which made us
one!'" He broke out into a stream of tears; while he threw himself down with his face
upon the table, and wetted the remaining papers with his weeping.

Werner stood beside him in the deepest perplexity. He had not anticipated this fierce
ebullition of feeling. More than once he had tried to interrupt his friend, more than
once to lead the conversation elsewhere, but in vain: the current was too strong for
him. It remained that long-suffering friendship should again take up her office. Werner
allowed the first shock of sorrow to pass over, while by his silent presence he testified
a pure and honest sympathy. And thus they both remained that evening,—Wilhelm
sunk in the dull feeling of old sorrows; and the other terrified at this new outbreaking
of a passion which he thought his prudent councils and keen persuasion had long since
mastered and destroyed.

CHAPTER III.
After such relapses, Wilhelm usually applied himself to business and activity with
augmented ardor; and he found it the best means to escape the labyrinth into which
he had again been tempted to enter. His attractive way of treating strangers, the ease
with which he carried on a correspondence in any living language, more and more
increased the hopes of his father and his trading-friends, and comforted them in their
sorrow for his sickness,—the origin of which had not been known,—and for the pause
which had thus interrupted their plan. They determined a second time on Wilhelm's
setting out to travel; and we now find him on horseback, with his saddle-bags behind
him, exhilarated by the motion and the free air, approaching the mountains, where he
had some affairs to settle.
He winded slowly on his path, through dales and over hills, with a feeling of the
greatest satisfaction. Overhanging cliffs, roaring brooks, moss-grown rocky walls, deep
precipices, he here saw for the first time; yet his earliest dreams of youth had
wandered among such regions. In these scenes he felt his age renewed; all the sorrows
he had undergone were obliterated from his soul; with unbroken cheerfulness he
repeated to himself passages of various poems, particularly of the "Pastor Fido,"
which, in these solitary places, flocked in crowds into his mind. He also recollected
many pieces of his own songs, and recited them with a peculiar contentment. He
peopled the world which lay before him with all the forms of the past, and each step
into the future was to him full of augury of important operations and remarkable
events.
Several men, who came behind him in succession, and saluted him as they passed by
to continue their hasty way into the mountains, by steep footpaths, sometimes
interrupted his thoughts without attracting his attention to themselves. At last a
communicative traveller joined him, and explained the reason of this general
pilgrimage.
"At Hochdorf," he said, "there is a play to be acted to-night; and the whole
neighborhood is gathering to see it."
"What!" cried Wilhelm. "In these solitary hills, among these impenetrable forests, has
theatric art sought out a place, and built herself a temple? And I am journeying to her
festivities!"

"You will wonder more," said the other, "when you learn by whom the play is to be
acted. There is in the place a large manufactory, which employs many people. The
proprietor, who lives, so to speak, remote from all human society, can find no better
means of entertaining his workmen during winter, than allowing them to act plays. He
suffers no cards among them, and wishes also to withdraw them from all coarse rustic
practices. Thus they pass the long evenings; and to-day, being the old gentleman's
birthday, they are giving a particular festival in honor of him."
Wilhelm came to Hochdorf, where he was to pass the night, and alighted at the
manufactory, the proprietor of which stood as a debtor in his list.
When he gave his name, the old man cried in a glad surprise, "Aye, sir, are you the son
of that worthy man to whom I owe so many thanks,—so long have owed money? Your
good father has had so much patience with me, I should be a knave if I did not pay you
speedily and cheerfully. You come at the proper time to see that I am fully in earnest
about it."
He then called out his wife, who seemed no less delighted than himself to see the
youth: she declared that he was very like his father, and lamented, that, having such a
multitude of guests already in the house, she could not lodge him for the night.
The account was clear, and quickly settled: Wilhelm put the roll of gold into his pocket,
and wished that all his other business might go on so smoothly. At last the play-hour
came: they now waited nothing but the coming of the head forester, who at length
also arrived, entered with a few hunters, and was received with the greatest
reverence.
The company was then led into the playhouse, formed out of a barn that lay close
upon the garden. Without any extraordinary taste, both seats and stage were yet
decked out in a cheerful and pretty way. One of the painters employed in the
manufactory had formerly worked as an understrapper at the prince's theatre: he had
now represented woods and streets and chambers, somewhat rudely, it is true, yet so
as to be recognized for such. The play itself they had borrowed from a strolling
company, and shaped it aright, according to their own ideas. As it was, it did not fail to
yield some entertainment. The plot of two lovers wishing to carry off a girl from her
guardian, and mutually from one another, produced a great variety of interesting
situations. Being the first play our friend had witnessed for so long a time, it suggested
several reflections to him. It was full of action, but without any true delineation of

character. It pleased and delighted. Such are always the beginnings of the scenic art.
The rude man is contented if he see but something going on; the man of more
refinement must be made to feel; the man entirely refined, desires to reflect.
The players he would willingly have helped here and there, for a very little would have
made them greatly better.
His silent meditations were somewhat broken in upon by the tobacco-smoke, which
now began to rise in great and greater copiousness. Soon after the commencement of
the play, the head forester had lit his pipe: by and by others took the same liberty. The
large dogs, too, which followed these gentlemen, introduced themselves in no
pleasant style. At first they had been bolted out; but, soon finding the back-door
passage, they entered on the stage, ran against the actors, and at last, jumping over
the orchestra, joined their masters, who had taken up the front seats in the pit.
For afterpiece an oblation was represented. A portrait of the old gentleman in his
bridegroom dress stood upon an altar, hung with garlands. All the players paid their
reverence to it in the most submissive postures. The youngest child came forward
dressed in white, and made a speech in verse; by which the whole family, and even the
head forester himself, whom it brought in mind of his own children, were melted into
tears. Thus ended the play; and Wilhelm could not help stepping on the stage, to have
a closer view of the actresses, to praise them for their good performance, and give
them a little counsel for the future.
The remaining business, which our friend in the following days had to transact in
various quarters of the hill-country, was not all so pleasant, or so easy to conclude with
satisfaction. Many of his debtors entreated for delay, many were uncourteous, many
lied. In conformity with his instructions, he had to sue some of them at law; he was
thus obliged to seek out advocates, and give instructions to them, to appear before
judges, and go through many other sorry duties of the same sort.
His case was hardly bettered when people chanced to incline showing some attention
to him. He found very few that could any way instruct him, few with whom he could
hope to establish a useful commercial correspondence. Unhappily, moreover, the
weather now grew rainy; and travelling on horseback in this district came to be
attended with insufferable difficulties. He therefore thanked his stars on again getting
near the level country; and at the foot of the mountains, looking out into a fertile and
beautiful plain, intersected by a smooth-flowing river, and seeing a cheerful little town

lying on its banks, all glittering in the sunshine, he resolved, though without any special
business in the place, to pass a day or two there, that he might refresh both himself
and his horse, which the bad roads had considerably injured.

CHAPTER IV.
On alighting at an inn, upon the market-place, he found matters going on very
joyously,—at least very stirringly. A large company of rope-dancers, leapers, and
jugglers, having a strong man along with them, had just arrived with their wives and
children, and, while preparing for a grand exhibition, kept up a perpetual racket. They
first quarrelled with the landlord, then with one another; and, if their contention was
intolerable, the expressions of their satisfaction were infinitely more so. Undetermined
whether he should go or stay, he was standing in the door looking at some workmen,
who had just begun to erect a stage in the middle of the square.
A girl with roses and other flowers for sale, coming by, held out her basket to him, and
he purchased a beautiful nosegay; which, like one that had a taste for these things, he
tied up in a different fashion, and was looking at it with a satisfied air, when the
window of another inn on the opposite side of the square flew open, and a handsome
woman looked out from it. Notwithstanding the distance, he observed that her face
was animated by a pleasant cheerfulness; her fair hair fell carelessly streaming about
her neck; she seemed to be looking at the stranger. In a short time afterwards, a boy
with a white jacket, and a barber's apron on, came out from the door of her house
towards Wilhelm, saluted him, and said, "The lady at the window bids me ask if you
will not favor her with a share of your beautiful flowers."—"They are all at her service,"
answered Wilhelm, giving the nosegay to this nimble messenger, and making a bow to
the fair one, who returned it with a friendly courtesy, and then withdrew from the
window.
Amused with this small adventure, he was going up-stairs to his chamber, when a
young creature sprang against him, and attracted his attention. A short silk waistcoat
with slashed Spanish sleeves, tight trousers with puffs, looked very pretty on the child.
Its long black hair was curled, and wound in locks and plaits about the head. He looked
at the figure with astonishment, and could not determine whether to take it for a boy
or a girl. However, he decided for the latter: and, as the child ran by, he took her up in
his arms, bade her good-day, and asked her to whom she belonged; though he easily
perceived that she must be a member of the vaulting and dancing company lately
arrived. She viewed him with a dark, sharp side-look, as she pushed herself out of his
arms, and ran into the kitchen without making any answer.
On coming up-stairs, he found in the large parlor two men practising the small sword,
or seeming rather to make trial which was the better fencer. One of them plainly

enough belonged to the vaulting company: the other had a somewhat less savage
aspect. Wilhelm looked at them, and had reason to admire them both; and as the
black-bearded, sturdy contender soon afterwards forsook the place of action, the
other with extreme complaisance offered Wilhelm the rapier.
"If you want to take a scholar under your inspection," said our friend, "I am well
content to risk a few passes with you."
Accordingly they fought together; and, although the stranger greatly overmatched his
new competitor, he politely kept declaring that it all depended upon practice; in fact,
Wilhelm, inferior as he was, had made it evident that he had got his first instructions
from a good, solid, thorough-paced German fencing-master.
Their entertainment was disturbed by the uproar with which the party-colored
brotherhood issued from the inn, to make proclamation of the show, and awaken a
desire to see their art, throughout the town. Preceded by a drum, the manager
advanced on horseback: he was followed by a female dancer mounted on a
corresponding hack, and holding a child before her, all bedizened with ribbons and
spangles. Next came the remainder of the troop on foot, some of them carrying
children on their shoulders in dangerous postures, yet smoothly and lightly: among
these the young, dark, black-haired figure again attracted Wilhelm's notice.
Pickleherring ran gayly up and down the crowded multitude, distributing his handbills
with much practical fun,—here smacking the lips of a girl, there breeching a boy, and
awakening generally among the people an invincible desire to know more of him.
On the painted flags, the manifold science of the company was visibly delineated,
particularly of the Monsieur Narciss and the Demoiselle Landrinette: both of whom,
being main characters, had prudently kept back from the procession, thereby to
acquire a more dignified consideration, and excite a greater curiosity.
During the procession, Wilhelm's fair neighbor had again appeared at the window; and
he did not fail to inquire about her of his new companion. This person, whom for the
present we shall call Laertes, offered to take Wilhelm over and introduce him. "I and
the lady," said he laughing, "are two fragments of an acting company that made
shipwreck here a short while ago. The pleasantness of the place has induced us to stay
in it, and consume our little stock of cash in peace; while one of our friends is out
seeking some situation for himself and us."

Laertes immediately accompanied his new acquaintance to Philina's door; where he
left him for a moment, and ran to a shop hard by for a few sweetmeats. "I am sure you
will thank me," said he, on returning, "for procuring you so pleasant an acquaintance."
The lady came out from her room, in a pair of tight little slippers with high heels, to
give them welcome. She had thrown a black mantle over her, above a white negligée,
not indeed superstitiously clean; which, however, for that very reason, gave her a
more frank and domestic air. Her short dress did not hide a pair of the prettiest feet
and ankles in the world.
"You are welcome," she cried to Wilhelm, "and I thank you for your charming flowers."
She led him into her chamber with the one hand, pressing the nosegay to her breast
with the other. Being all seated, and got into a pleasant train of general talk, to which
she had the art of giving a delightful turn, Laertes threw a handful of gingerbread-nuts
into her lap; and she immediately began to eat them.
"Look what a child this young gallant is!" she said: "he wants to persuade you that I am
fond of such confectionery, and it is himself that cannot live without licking his lips
over something of the kind."
"Let us confess," replied Laertes, "that in this point, as in others, you and I go hand in
hand. For example," he continued, "the weather is delightful to-day: what if we should
take a drive into the country, and eat our dinner at the Mill?"
"With all my heart," said Philina: "we must give our new acquaintance some
diversion."
Laertes sprang out, for he never walked: and Wilhelm motioned to return for a minute
to his lodgings, to have his hair put in order; for at present it was all dishevelled with
riding. "You can do it here," she said, then called her little servant, and constrained
Wilhelm in the politest manner to lay off his coat, to throw her powder-mantle over
him, and to have his head dressed in her presence. "We must lose no time," said she:
"who knows how short a while we may all be together?"
The boy, out of sulkiness and ill nature more than want of skill, went on but
indifferently with his task: he pulled the hair with his implements, and seemed as if he
would not soon be done. Philina more than once reproved him for his blunders, and at
last sharply packed him off, and chased him to the door. She then undertook the

business herself, and frizzled Wilhelm's locks with great dexterity and grace; though
she, too, appeared to be in no exceeding haste, but found always this and that to
improve and put to rights; while at the same time she could not help touching his
knees with hers, and holding her nosegay and bosom so near his lips, that he was
strongly tempted more than once to imprint a kiss on it.
When Wilhelm had cleaned his brow with a little powder-knife, she said to him, "Put it
in your pocket, and think of me when you see it." It was a pretty knife: the haft, of
inlaid steel, had these friendly words wrought on it, "Think of me." Wilhelm put it up,
and thanked her, begging permission at the same time to make her a little present in
return.
At last they were in readiness. Laertes had brought round the coach, and they
commenced a very gay excursion. To every beggar, Philina threw out money from the
window; giving along with it a merry and friendly word.
Scarcely had they reached the Mill, and ordered dinner, when a strain of music struck
up before the house. It was some miners singing various pretty songs, and
accompanying their clear and shrill voices with a cithern and triangle. In a short while
the gathering crowd had formed a ring about them, and our company nodded
approbation to them from the windows. Observing this attention, they expanded their
circle, and seemed making preparation for their grandest piece. After some pause, a
miner stepped forward with a mattock in his hand; and, while the others played a
serious tune, he set himself to represent the action of digging.
Ere long a peasant came from among the crowd, and, by pantomimic threats, let the
former know that he must cease and remove. Our company were greatly surprised at
this: they did not discover that the peasant was a miner in disguise, till he opened his
mouth, and, in a sort of recitative, rebuked the other for daring to meddle with his
field. The latter did not lose his composure of mind, but began to inform the
husbandman about his right to break ground there; giving him withal some primary
conceptions of mineralogy. The peasant, not being master of his foreign terminology,
asked all manner of silly questions; whereat the spectators, as themselves more
knowing, set up many a hearty laugh. The miner endeavored to instruct him, and
showed him the advantage, which, in the long-run, would reach even him, if the deeplying treasures of the land were dug out from their secret beds. The peasant, who at
first had threatened his instructor with blows, was gradually pacified; and they parted

good friends at last, though it was the miner chiefly that got out of this contention with
honor.
"In this little dialogue," said Wilhelm, when seated at the table, "we have a lively proof
how useful the theatre might be to all ranks; what advantage even the state might
procure from it, if the occupations, trades, and undertakings of men were brought
upon the stage, and presented on their praiseworthy side, in that point of view in
which the state itself should honor and protect them. As matters stand, we exhibit
only the ridiculous side of men: the comic poet is, as it were, but a spiteful taxgatherer, who keeps a watchful eye over the errors of his fellow-subjects, and seems
gratified when he can fix any charge upon them. Might it not be a worthy and pleasing
task for a statesman to survey the natural and reciprocal influence of all classes on
each other, and to guide some poet, gifted with sufficient humor, in such labors as
these? In this way, I am persuaded, many very entertaining, both agreeable and useful,
pieces, might be executed."
"So far," said Laertes, "as I, in wandering about the world, have been able to observe,
statesmen are accustomed merely to forbid, to hinder, to refuse, but very rarely to
invite, to further, to reward. They let all things go along, till some mischief happens:
then they get into a rage, and lay about them."
"A truce with state and statesmen!" said Philina: "I cannot form a notion of statesmen
except in periwigs; and a periwig, wear it who will, always gives my fingers a spasmodic
motion: I could like to pluck it off the venerable gentleman, to skip up and down the
room with it, and laugh at the bald head."
So, with a few lively songs, which she could sing very beautifully, Philina cut short their
conversation, and urged them to a quick return homewards, that they might arrive in
time for seeing the performance of the rope-dancers in the evening. On the road back
she continued her lavish generosity, in a style of gayety reaching to extravagance; for
at last, every coin belonging to herself or her companions being spent, she threw her
straw hat from the window to a girl, and her neckerchief to an old woman, who asked
her for alms.
Philina invited both of her attendants to her own apartments, because, she said, the
spectacle could be seen more conveniently from her windows than from theirs.

On arriving, they found the stage set up, and the background decked with suspended
carpets. The swing-boards were already fastened, the slack-rope fixed to posts, the
tight-rope bound over trestles. The square was moderately filled with people, and the
windows with spectators of some quality.
Pickleherring, with a few insipidities, at which the lookers-on are generally kind
enough to laugh, first prepared the meeting to attention and good-humor. Some
children, whose bodies were made to exhibit the strangest contortions, awakened
astonishment or horror; and Wilhelm could not, without the deepest sympathy, see
the child he had at the first glance felt an interest in, go through her fantastic positions
with considerable difficulty. But the merry tumblers soon changed the feeling into that
of lively satisfaction, when they first singly, then in rows, and at last all together,
vaulted up into the air, making somersets backwards and forwards. A loud clapping of
hands and a strong huzza echoed from the whole assembly.
The general attention was next directed to quite a different object. The children in
succession had to mount the rope,—the learners first, that by practising they might
prolong the spectacle, and show the difficulties of the art more clearly. Some men and
full-grown women likewise exhibited their skill to moderate advantage; but still there
was no Monsieur Narciss, no Demoiselle Landrinette.
At last this worthy pair came forth: they issued from a kind of tent with red spread
curtains, and, by their agreeable forms and glittering decorations, fulfilled the hitherto
increasing hopes of the spectators. He, a hearty knave, of middle stature, with black
eyes and a strong head of hair; she, formed with not inferior symmetry,—exhibited
themselves successively upon the rope, with delicate movements, leaping, and singular
postures. Her airy lightness, his audacity; the exactitude with which they both
performed their feats of art,—raised the universal satisfaction higher at every step and
spring. The stateliness with which they bore themselves, the seeming attentions of the
rest to them, gave them the appearance of king and queen of the whole troop; and all
held them worthy of the rank.
The animation of the people spread to the spectators at the windows: the ladies
looked incessantly at Narciss, the gentlemen at Landrinette. The populace hurrahed,
the more cultivated public could not keep from clapping of the hands: Pickleherring
now could scarcely raise a laugh. A few, however, slunk away when some members of
the troop began to press through the crowd with their tin plates to collect money.

"They have made their purpose good, I imagine," said Wilhelm to Philina, who was
leaning over the window beside him. "I admire the ingenuity with which they have
turned to advantage even the meanest parts of their performance: out of the
unskilfulness of their children, and exquisiteness of their chief actors, they have made
up a whole which at first excited our attention, and then gave us very fine
entertainment."
The people by degrees dispersed; and the square was again become empty, while
Philina and Laertes were disputing about the forms and the skill of Narciss and
Landrinette, and rallying each other on the subject at great length. Wilhelm noticed
the wonderful child standing on the street near some other children at play: he
showed her to Philina, who, in her lively way, immediately called and beckoned to the
little one, and, this not succeeding, tripped singing down stairs, and led her up by the
hand.
"Here is the enigma," said she, as she brought her to the door. The child stood upon
the threshold, as if she meant again to run off; laid her right hand on her breast, the
left on her brow, and bowed deeply. "Fear nothing, my little dear," said Wilhelm,
rising, and going towards her. She viewed him with a doubting look, and came a few
steps nearer.
"What is thy name?" he asked. "They call me Mignon."—"How old art thou?"—"No
one has counted."—"Who was thy father?"—"The Great Devil is dead."
"Well! this is singular enough," said Philina. They asked her a few more questions: she
gave her answers in a kind of broken German, and with a strangely solemn manner;
every time laying her hands on her breast and brow, and bowing deeply.
Wilhelm could not satisfy himself with looking at her. His eyes and his heart were
irresistibly attracted by the mysterious condition of this being. He reckoned her about
twelve or thirteen years of age: her body was well formed, only her limbs gave promise
of a stronger growth, or else announced a stunted one. Her countenance was not
regular, but striking; her brow full of mystery; her nose extremely beautiful; her
mouth, although it seemed too closely shut for one of her age, and though she often
threw it to a side, had yet an air of frankness, and was very lovely. Her brownish
complexion could scarcely be discerned through the paint. This form stamped itself
deeply in Wilhelm's soul: he kept looking at her earnestly, and forgot the present
scene in the multitude of his reflections. Philina waked him from his half-dream, by

holding out the remainder of her sweetmeats to the child, and giving her a sign to go
away. She made her little bow as formerly, and darted like lightning through the door.
As the time drew on when our new friends had to part for the evening, they planned a
fresh excursion for the morrow. They purposed now to have their dinner at a
neighboring Jägerhaus. Before taking leave of Laertes, Wilhelm said many things in
Philina's praise, to which the other made only brief and careless answers.
Next morning, having once more exercised themselves in fencing for an hour, they
went over to Philina's lodging, towards which they had seen their expected coach
passing by. But how surprised was Wilhelm, when the coach seemed altogether to
have vanished; and how much more so, when Philina was not to be found at home!
She had placed herself in the carriage, they were told, with a couple of strangers who
had come that morning, and was gone with them. Wilhelm had been promising himself
some pleasant entertainment from her company, and could not hide his irritation.
Laertes, on the other hand, but laughed at it, and cried, "I love her for this: it looks so
like herself! Let us, however, go directly to the Jägerhaus: be Philina where she
pleases, we will not lose our promenade on her account."
As Wilhelm, while they walked, continued censuring the inconsistency of such conduct,
Laertes said, "I cannot reckon it inconsistent so long as one keeps faithful to his
character. If this Philina plans you any thing, or promises you any thing, she does it
under the tacit condition that it shall be quite convenient for her to fulfil her plan, to
keep her promise. She gives willingly, but you must ever hold yourself in readiness to
return her gifts."
"That seems a singular character," said Wilhelm.
"Any thing but singular: only she is not a hypocrite. I like her on that account. Yes: I am
her friend, because she represents the sex so truly, which I have so much cause to
hate. To me she is another genuine Eve, the great mother of womankind: so are they
all, only they will not all confess it."
With abundance of such talk, in which Laertes very vehemently exhibited his spleen
against the fair sex, without, however, giving any cause for it, they arrived at the
forest; into which Wilhelm entered in no joyful mood, the speeches of Laertes having
again revived in him the memory of his relation to Mariana. Not far from a shady well,
among some old and noble trees, they found Philina sitting by herself at a stone table.

Seeing them, she struck up a merry song; and, when Laertes asked for her companions,
she cried out, "I have already cozened them: I have already had my laugh at them, and
sent them a-travelling, as they deserved. By the way hither I had put to proof their
liberality; and, finding that they were a couple of your close-fisted gentry, I
immediately determined to have amends of them. On arriving at the inn, they asked
the waiter what was to be had. He, with his customary glibness of tongue, reckoned
over all that could be found in the house, and more than could be found. I noticed
their perplexity: they looked at one another, stammered, and inquired about the cost.
"What is the use of all this studying?" said I. "The table is the lady's business: allow me
to manage it." I immediately began ordering a most unconscionable dinner, for which
many necessary articles would require to be sent for from the neighborhood. The
waiter, of whom, by a wry mouth or two, I had made a confidant, at last helped me
out; and so, by the image of a sumptuous feast, we tortured them to such a degree
that they fairly determined on having a walk in the forest, from which I imagine we
shall look with clear eyes if we see them come again. I have laughed a quarter of an
hour for my own behoof; I shall laugh forever when I think of the looks they had." At
table, Laertes told of similar adventures: they got into the track of recounting ludicrous
stories, mistakes, and dexterous cheats.
A young man of their acquaintance, from the town, came gliding through the wood
with a book in his hand: he sat down by them, and began praising the beauty of the
place. He directed their attention to the murmuring of the brook, to the waving of the
boughs, to the checkered lights and shadows, and the music of the birds. Philina
commenced a little song of the cuckoo, which did not seem at all to exhilarate the man
of taste: he very soon made his compliments, and went on.
"Oh that I might never hear more of nature, and scenes of nature!" cried Philina, so
soon as he was gone: "there is nothing in the world more intolerable than to hear
people reckon up the pleasures you enjoy. When the day is bright you go to walk, as to
dance when you hear a tune played. But who would think a moment on the music or
the weather? It is the dancer that interests us, not the violin; and to look upon a pair of
bright black eyes is the life of a pair of blue ones. But what on earth have we to do with
wells and brooks, and old rotten lindens?" She was sitting opposite to Wilhelm; and,
while speaking so, she looked into his eyes with a glance which he could not hinder
from piercing at least to the very door of his heart.

"You are right," replied he, not without embarrassment: "man is ever the most
interesting object to man, and perhaps should be the only one that interests.
Whatever else surrounds us is but the element in which we live, or else the instrument
which we employ. The more we devote ourselves to such things, the more we attend
to and feel concern in them, the weaker will our sense of our own dignity become, the
weaker our feelings for society. Men who put a great value on gardens, buildings,
clothes, ornaments, or any other sort of property, grow less social and pleasant: they
lose sight of their brethren, whom very few can succeed in collecting about them and
entertaining. Have you not observed it on the stage? A good actor makes us very soon
forget the awkwardness and meanness of paltry decorations, but a splendid theatre is
the very thing which first makes us truly feel the want of proper actors."
After dinner Philina sat down among the long, overshaded grass, and commanded
both her friends to fetch her flowers in great quantities. She wreathed a complete
garland, and put it round her head: it made her look extremely charming. The flowers
were still sufficient for another: this, too, she plaited, while both the young men sat
beside her. When, at last, amid infinite mirth and sportfulness, it was completed, she
pressed it on Wilhelm's head with the greatest dignity, and shifted the posture of it
more than once, till it seemed to her properly adjusted. "And I, it appears, must go
empty," said Laertes.
"Not by any means: you shall not have reason to complain," replied Philina, taking off
the garland from her own head, and putting it on his.
"If we were rivals," said Laertes, "we might now dispute very warmly which of us stood
higher in thy favor."
"And the more fools you," said she, while she bent herself towards him, and offered
him her lips to kiss; and then immediately turned round, threw her arm about
Wilhelm, and bestowed a kind salute on him also. "Which of them tastes best?" said
she archly.
"Surprisingly!" exclaimed Laertes: "it seems as if nothing else had ever such a tang of
wormwood in it."
"As little wormwood," she replied, "as any gift that a man may enjoy without envy and
without conceit. But now," cried she, "I should like to have an hour's dancing; and after
that we must look to our vaulters."

Accordingly, they went into the house, and there found music in readiness. Philina was
a beautiful dancer: she animated both her companions. Nor was Wilhelm without skill;
but he wanted careful practice, a defect which his two friends voluntarily took charge
of remedying.
In these amusements the time passed on insensibly. It was already late when they
returned. The rope-dancers had commenced their operations. A multitude of people
had again assembled in the square; and our friends, on alighting, were struck by the
appearance of a tumult in the crowd, occasioned by a throng of men rushing towards
the door of the inn, which Wilhelm had now turned his face to. He sprang forward to
see what it was; and, pressing through the people, he was struck with horror to
observe the master of the rope-dancing company dragging poor Mignon by the hair
out of the house, and unmercifully beating her little body with the handle of a whip.
Wilhelm darted on the man like lightning, and seized him by the collar. "Quit the
child!" he cried, in a furious tone, "or one of us shall never leave this spot!" and, so
speaking, he grasped the fellow by the throat with a force which only rage could have
lent him. The showman, on the point of choking, let go the child, and endeavored to
defend himself against his new assailant. But some people, who had felt compassion
for Mignon, yet had not dared to begin a quarrel for her, now laid hold of the ropedancer, wrenched his whip away, and threatened him with great fierceness and abuse.
Being now reduced to the weapons of his mouth, he began bullying, and cursing
horribly. The lazy, worthless urchin, he said, would not do her duty; refused to perform
the egg-dance, which he had promised to the public; he would beat her to death, and
no one should hinder him. He tried to get loose, and seek the child, who had crept
away among the crowd. Wilhelm held him back, and said sternly, "You shall neither see
nor touch her, till you have explained before a magistrate where you stole her. I will
pursue you to every extremity. You shall not escape me." These words, which Wilhelm
uttered in heat, without thought or purpose, out of some vague feeling, or, if you will,
out of inspiration, soon brought the raging showman to composure. "What have I to
do with the useless brat?" cried he. "Pay me what her clothes cost, and make of her
what you please. We shall settle it to-night." And, being liberated, he made haste to
resume his interrupted operations, and to calm the irritation of the public by some
striking displays of his craft.
As soon as all was still again, Wilhelm commenced a search for Mignon, whom,
however, he could nowhere find. Some said they had seen her on the street, others on

the roofs of the adjoining houses; but, after seeking unsuccessfully in all quarters, he
was forced to content himself, and wait to see if she would not again turn up of
herself.
In the mean time, Narciss had come into the house; and Wilhelm set to question him
about the birthplace and history of the child. Monsieur Narciss knew nothing about
these things, for he had not long been in the company; but in return he recited, with
much volubility and levity, various particulars of his own fortune. Upon Wilhelm's
wishing him joy of the great approbation he had gained, Narciss expressed himself as if
exceedingly indifferent on that point. "People laugh at us," he said, "and admire our
feats of skill; but their admiration does nothing for us. The master has to pay us, and
may raise the funds where he pleases." He then took his leave, and was setting off in
great haste.
At the question, whither he was bent so fast, the dog gave a smile, and admitted that
his figure and talents had acquired for him a more solid species of favor than the
huzzaing of the multitude. He had been invited by some young ladies, who desired
much to become acquainted with him; and he was afraid it would be midnight before
he could get all his visits over. He proceeded with the greatest candor to detail
his adventures. He would have given the names of his patronesses, their streets and
houses, had not Wilhelm waived such indiscretion, and politely dismissed him.
Laertes had meanwhile been entertaining Landrinette: he declared that she was fully
worthy to be and to remain a woman.
Our friend next proceeded to his bargain with the showman for Mignon. Thirty crowns
was the price set upon her; and for this sum the black-bearded, hot Italian entirely
surrendered all his claims: but of her history or parentage he would discover nothing,
only that she had fallen into his hands at the death of his brother, who, by reason of
his admirable skill, had usually been named the "Great Devil."
Next morning was chiefly spent in searching for the child. It was in vain that they
rummaged every hole and corner of the house and neighborhood: the child had
vanished; and Wilhelm was afraid she might have leaped into some pool of water, or
destroyed herself in some other way.
Philina's charms could not divert his inquietude. He passed a dreary, thoughtful day.
Nor at evening could the utmost efforts of the tumblers and dancers, exerting all their

powers to gratify the public, divert the current of his thoughts, or clear away the
clouds from his mind.
By the concourse of people flocking from all places round, the numbers had greatly
increased on this occasion: the general approbation was like a snowball rolling itself
into a monstrous size. The feat of leaping over swords, and through the cask with
paper ends, made a great sensation.
The strong man, too, produced a universal feeling of mingled astonishment and horror,
when he laid his head and feet on a couple of separate stools, and then allowed some
sturdy smiths to place a stithy on the unsupported part of his body, and hammer a
horseshoe till it was completely made by means of it.
The Hercules' Strength, as they called it, was a no less wonderful affair. A row of men
stood up; then another row, upon their shoulders; then women and young lads,
supported in like manner on the second row; so that finally a living pyramid was
formed; the peak being ornamented by a child, placed on its head, and dressed out in
the shape of a ball and weather-vane. Such a sight, never witnessed in those parts
before, gave a worthy termination to the whole performance. Narciss and Landrinette
were then borne in litters, on the shoulders of the rest, along the chief streets of the
town, amid the triumphant shouts of the people. Ribbons, nosegays, silks, were
thrown upon them: all pressed to get a sight of them. Each thought himself happy if he
could behold them, and be honored with a look of theirs.
"What actor, what author, nay, what man of any class, would not regard himself as on
the summit of his wishes, could he, by a noble saying or a worthy action, produce so
universal an impression? What a precious emotion would it give, if one could
disseminate generous, exalted, manly feelings with electric force and speed, and rouse
assembled thousands into such rapture, as these people, by their bodily alertness,
have done! If one could communicate to thronging multitudes a fellow-feeling in all
that belongs to man, by the portraying of happiness and misery, of wisdom and folly,
nay, of absurdity and silliness; could kindle and thrill their inmost souls, and set their
stagnant nature into movement, free, vehement, and pure!" So said our friend; and, as
neither Laertes nor Philina showed any disposition to take part in such a strain, he
entertained himself with these darling speculations, walking up and down the streets
till late at night, and again pursuing, with all the force and vivacity of a liberated
imagination, his old desire to have all that was good and noble and great embodied
and shown forth by the theatric art.

CHAPTER V.
Next morning, the rope-dancers, not without much parade and bustle, having gone
away, Mignon immediately appeared, and came into the parlor as Wilhelm and Laertes
were busy fencing. "Where hast thou been hid?" said Wilhelm, in a friendly tone.
"Thou hast given us a great deal of anxiety." The child looked at him, and answered
nothing. "Thou art ours now," cried Laertes: "we have bought thee."—"For how
much?" inquired the child quite coolly. "For a hundred ducats," said the other: "pay
them again, and thou art free."—"Is that very much?" she asked. "Oh, yes! thou must
now be a good child."—"I will try," she said.
From that moment she observed strictly what services the waiter had to do for both
her friends; and, after next day, she would not any more let him enter the room. She
persisted in doing every thing herself, and accordingly went through her duties, slowly,
indeed, and sometimes awkwardly, yet completely, and with the greatest care.
She was frequently observed going to a basin of water, and washing her face with such
diligence and violence, that she almost wore the skin from her cheeks; till Laertes, by
dint of questions and reproofs, learned that she was striving by all means to get the
paint from her skin, and that, in her zealous endeavors towards this object, she had
mistaken the redness produced by rubbing for the most obdurate dye. They set her
right on this point, and she ceased her efforts; after which, having come again to her
natural state, she exhibited a fine brown complexion, beautiful, though sparingly
intermingled with red.
The siren charms of Philina, the mysterious presence of the child, produced more
impression on our friend than he liked to confess: he passed several days in that
strange society, endeavoring to elude self-reproaches by a diligent practice of fencing
and dancing,—accomplishments which he believed might not again be put within his
reach so conveniently.
It was with great surprise, and not without a certain satisfaction, that he one day
observed Herr Melina and his wife alight at the inn. After the first glad salutation, they
inquired about "the lady-manager and the other actors," and learned, with
astonishment and terror, that the lady-manager had long since gone away, and her
actors, to a very few, dispersed themselves about the country.

This couple, subsequently to their marriage, in which, as we know, our friend did his
best to serve them, had been travelling about in various quarters, seeking an
engagement, without finding any, and had at last been directed to this little town by
some persons who met them on their journey, and said there was a good theatre in
the place.
Melina by no means pleased the lively Laertes, when introduced to him, any more than
his wife did Philina. Both heartily wished to be rid of these new-comers; and Wilhelm
could inspire them with no favorable feelings on the subject, though he more than
once assured them that the Melinas were very worthy people.
Indeed, the previous merry life of our three adventurers was interfered with by this
extension of their society, in more ways than one. Melina had taken up his quarters in
the inn where Philina staid, and he very soon began a system of cheapening and
higgling. He would have better lodging, more sumptuous diet, and readier attendance,
for a smaller charge. In a short while, the landlord and waiter showed very rueful
looks; for whereas the others, to get pleasantly along, had expressed no discontent
with any thing, and paid instantly, that they might avoid thinking longer of payment,
Melina now insisted on regulating every meal, and investigating its contents
beforehand,—a species of service for which Philina named him, without scruple, a
ruminating animal.
Yet more did the merry girl hate Melina's wife. Frau Melina was a young woman not
without culture, but wofully defective in soul and spirit. She could declaim not badly,
and kept declaiming constantly; but it was easy to observe that her performances were
little more than recitations of words. She labored a few detached passages, but never
could express the feeling of the whole. Withal, however, she was seldom disagreeable
to any one, especially to men. On the contrary, people who enjoyed her acquaintance
commonly ascribed to her a fine understanding; for she was what might be called a
kind of spiritual chameleon, or taker-on. Any friend whose favor she had need of she
could flatter with peculiar adroitness, could give in to his ideas so long as she could
understand them, and, when they went beyond her own horizon, could hail with
ecstasy such new and brilliant visions. She understood well when to speak and when to
keep silence; and, though her disposition was not spiteful, she could spy out with great
expertness where another's weak side lay.

CHAPTER VI.
Melina, in the mean time, had been making strict inquiry about the wrecks of the late
theatrical establishment. The wardrobe, as well as decorations, had been pawned with
some traders; and a notary had been empowered, under certain conditions, to dispose
of them by sale, should purchasers occur. Melina wished to see this ware, and he
took Wilhelm with him. No sooner was the room opened, than our friend felt towards
its contents a kind of inclination, which he would not confess to himself. Sad as was
the state of the blotched and tarnished decorations; little showy as the Turkish and
pagan garments, the old farce-coats for men and women, the cowls for enchanters,
priests, and Jews, might be,—he was not able to exclude the feeling, that the happiest
moments of his life had been spent in a similar magazine of frippery. Could Melina
have seen into his heart, he would have urged him more pressingly to lay out a sum of
money in liberating these scattered fragments, in furbishing them up, and again
combining them into a beautiful whole. "What a happy man could I be," cried Melina,
"had I but two hundred crowns, to get into my hands, for a beginning, these
fundamental necessaries of a theatre! How soon should I get up a little playhouse, that
would draw contributions from the town and neighborhood, and maintain us all!"
Wilhelm was silent. They left these treasures of the stage to be again locked up, and
both went away in a reflective mood.
Thenceforth Melina talked of nothing else but projects and plans for setting up a
theatre, and gaining profit by it. He tried to interest Philina and Laertes in his schemes;
and proposals were made to Wilhelm about advancing money, and taking them as his
security. On this occasion, Wilhelm first clearly perceived that he was lingering too
long here: he excused himself, and set about making preparations for departure.
In the mean time, Mignon's form, and manner of existence, were growing more
attractive to him every day. In her whole system of proceedings there was something
very singular. She never walked up or down the stairs, but jumped. She would spring
along by the railing, and before you were aware would be sitting quietly above upon
the landing. Wilhelm had observed, also, that she had a different sort of salutation for
each individual. For himself, it had of late been with her arms crossed upon her breast.
Often for the whole day she was mute. At times she answered various questions more
freely, yet always strangely: so that you could not determine whether it was caused by
shrewd sense, or ignorance of the language; for she spoke in broken German
interlaced with French and Italian. In Wilhelm's service she was indefatigable, and up

before the sun. On the other hand, she vanished early in the evening, went to sleep in
a little room upon the bare floor, and could not by any means be induced to take a bed
or even a paillasse. He often found her washing herself. Her clothes, too, were kept
scrupulously clean; though nearly all about her was quilted two or three plies thick.
Wilhelm was moreover told, that she went every morning early to hear mass. He
followed her on one occasion, and saw her kneeling down with a rosary in a corner of
the church, and praying devoutly. She did not observe him; and he returned home,
forming many a conjecture about this appearance, yet unable to arrive at any probable
conclusion.
A new application from Melina for a sum of money to redeem the often-mentioned
stage apparatus caused Wilhelm to think more seriously than ever about setting off.
He proposed writing to his people, who for a long time had heard no tidings of him, by
the very earliest post. He accordingly commenced a letter to Werner, and had
advanced a considerable way with the history of his adventures, in recounting which
he had more than once unintentionally swerved a little from the truth, when, to his
vexation and surprise, he observed, upon the back of his sheet, some verses which he
had been copying from his album for Madam Melina. Out of humor at this mistake, he
tore the paper in pieces, and put off repeating his confession till the next post-day.

CHAPTER VII.
Our party was now again collected; and Philina, who always kept a sharp lookout on
every horse or carriage that passed by, exclaimed with great eagerness, "Our Pedant!
Here comes our dearest Pedant! Who the deuce is it he has with him?" Speaking thus,
she beckoned at the window; and the vehicle drew up.
A woful-looking genius, whom by his shabby coat of grayish brown, and his illconditioned lower garments, you must have taken for some unprosperous preceptor,
of the sort that moulder in our universities, now descended from the carriage, and,
taking off his hat to salute Philina, discovered an ill-powdered, but yet very stiff,
periwig; while Philina threw a hundred kisses of the hand towards him.
As Philina's chief enjoyment lay in loving one class of men, and being loved by them; so
there was a second and hardly inferior satisfaction, wherewith she entertained herself
as frequently as possible; and this consisted in hoodwinking and passing jokes upon
the other class, whom at such moments she happened not to love,—all which she
could accomplish in a very sprightly style.
Amid the flourish which she made in receiving this old friend, no attention was
bestowed upon the rest who followed him. Yet among the party were an oldish man
and two young girls, whom Wilhelm thought he knew. Accordingly it turned out, that
he had often seen them all, some years ago, in a company then playing in his native
town. The daughters had grown since that period: the old man was a little altered. He
commonly enacted those good-hearted, boisterous old gentlemen, whom the German
theatre is never without, and whom, in common life, one also frequently enough falls
in with. For as it is the character of our countrymen to do good, and cause it, without
pomp or circumstance; so they seldom consider that there is likewise a mode of doing
what is right with grace and dignity: more frequently, indeed, they yield to the spirit of
contradiction, and fall into the error of deforming their dearest virtue by a surly mode
of putting it in practice.
Such parts our actor could play very well; and he played them so often and exclusively,
that he had himself taken up the same turn of proceeding in his ordinary life.
On recognizing him, Wilhelm was seized with a strong commotion; for he recollected
how often he had seen this man on the stage with his beloved Mariana: he still heard

him scolding, still heard the small, soothing voice, with which in many characters she
had to meet his rugged temper.
The first anxious question put to the strangers,—Whether they had heard of any
situation in their travels?—was answered, alas, with No! and, to complete the
information, it was further added, that all the companies they had fallen in with were
not only supplied with actors, but many of them were afraid lest, on account of the
approaching war, they should be forced to separate. Old Boisterous, with his
daughters, moved by spleen and love of change, had given up an advantageous
engagement: then, meeting with the Pedant by the way, they had hired a carriage to
come hither; where, as they found, good counsel was still dear, needful to have, and
difficult to get.
The time while the rest were talking very keenly of their circumstances, Wilhelm spent
in thought. He longed to speak in private with the old man: he wished and feared to
hear of Mariana, and felt the greatest disquietude.
The pretty looks of the stranger damsels could not call him from his dream; but a war
of words, which now arose, awakened his attention. It was Friedrich, the fair-haired
boy who used to attend Philina, stubbornly refusing, on this occasion, to cover the
table and bring up dinner. "I engaged to serve you," he cried, "but not to wait on
everybody." They fell into a hot contest. Philina insisted that he should do his duty;
and, as he obstinately refused, she told him plainly he might go about his business.
"You think, perhaps, I cannot leave you!" cried he sturdily, then went to pack up his
bundle, and soon hastily quitted the house.
"Go, Mignon," said Philina, "and get us what we want; tell the waiter, and help him to
attend us."
Mignon came before Wilhelm, and asked in her laconic way, "Shall I? May I?" To which
Wilhelm answered, "Do all the lady bids thee, child."
She accordingly took charge of every thing, and waited on the guests the whole
evening, with the utmost carefulness. After dinner, Wilhelm proposed to have a walk
with the old man alone. Succeeding in this, after many questions about his late
wanderings, the conversation turned upon the former company; and Wilhelm
hazarded a question touching Mariana.

"Do not speak to me of that despicable creature!" cried the old man: "I have sworn to
think of her no more." Terrified at this speech, Wilhelm felt still more embarrassed, as
the old man proceeded to vituperate her fickleness and wantonness. Most gladly
would our friend have broken off the conversation, but now it was impossible: he was
obliged to undergo the whole tumultuous effusions of this strange old gentleman.
"I am ashamed," continued he, "that I felt such a friendship for her. Yet, had you
known the girl better, you would excuse me. She was so pretty, so natural and good,
so pleasing, in every sense so tolerable, I could never have supposed that ingratitude
and impudence were to prove the chief features of her character."
Wilhelm had nerved himself to hear the worst of her; when all at once he observed,
with astonishment, that the old man's tones grew milder, his voice faltered, and he
took out his handkerchief to dry the tears, which at last began to trickle down his
cheeks.
"What is the matter with you?" cried Wilhelm. "What is it that suddenly so changes the
current of your feelings? Conceal it not from me. I take a deeper interest in the fate of
this girl than you suppose. Only tell me all."
"I have not much to say," replied the old man, again taking up his earnest, angry tone.
"I have suffered more from her than I shall ever forgive. She had always a kind of trust
in me. I loved her as my own daughter; indeed, while my wife lived, I had formed a
resolution to take the creature to my own house, and save her from the hands of that
old crone, from whose guidance I boded no good. But my wife died, and the project
went to nothing.
"About the end of our stay in your native town,—it is not quite three years ago,—I
noticed a visible sadness about her. I questioned her, but she evaded me. At last we
set out on our journey. She travelled in the same coach with me; and I soon observed,
what she herself did not long deny, that she was with child, and suffering the greatest
terror lest our manager might turn her off. In fact, in a short while he did make the
discovery; immediately threw up her contract, which at any rate was only for six
weeks; paid off her arrears; and, in spite of all entreaties, left her behind, in the
miserable inn of a little village.
"Devil take all wanton jilts!" cried the old man, with a splenetic tone, "and especially
this one, that has spoiled me so many hours of my life! Why should I keep talking how I

myself took charge of her, what I did for her, what I spent on her, how in absence I
provided for her? I would rather throw my purse into the ditch, and spend my time in
nursing mangy whelps, than ever more bestow the smallest care on such a thing.
Pshaw! At first I got letters of thanks, notice of places she was staying at; and, finally,
no word at all,—not even an acknowledgment for the money I had sent to pay the
expenses of her lying-in. Oh! the treachery and the fickleness of women are rightly
matched, to get a comfortable living for themselves, and to give an honest fellow many
heavy hours."

CHAPTER VIII.
Wilhelm's feelings, on returning home after this conversation, may be easily
conceived. All his old wounds had been torn up afresh, and the sentiment that
Mariana was not wholly unworthy of his love had again been brought to life. The
interest the old man had shown about her fate, the praises he gave her against his will,
displayed her again in all her attractiveness. Nay, even the bitter accusations brought
against her contained nothing that could lower her in Wilhelm's estimation; for he, as
well as she, was guilty in all her aberrations. Nor did even her final silence seem greatly
blamable: it rather inspired him with mournful thoughts. He saw her as a frail, illsuccored mother, wandering helplessly about the world,—wandering, perhaps, with
his own child. What he knew, and what he knew not, awoke in him the painfullest
emotions.
Mignon had been waiting for him: she lighted him up stairs. On setting down the light,
she begged he would allow her, that evening, to compliment him with a piece of her
art. He would rather have declined this, particularly as he knew not what it was; but he
had not the heart to refuse any thing this kind creature wished. After a little while she
again came in. She carried below her arm a little carpet, which she then spread out
upon the floor. Wilhelm said she might proceed. She thereupon brought four candles,
and placed one upon each corner of the carpet. A little basket of eggs, which she next
carried in, made her purpose clearer. Carefully measuring her steps, she then walked
to and fro on the carpet, spreading out the eggs in certain figures and positions; which
done, she called in a man that was waiting in the house, and could play on the violin.
He retired with his instrument into a corner: she tied a band about her eyes, gave a
signal; and, like a piece of wheel-work set a-going, she began moving the same instant
as the music, accompanying her beats and the notes of the tune with the strokes of a
pair of castanets.
Lightly, nimbly, quickly, and with hair's-breadth accuracy, she carried on the dance.
She skipped so sharply and surely along between the eggs, and trod so closely down
beside them, that you would have thought every instant she must trample one of them
in pieces, or kick the rest away in her rapid turns. By no means! She touched no one of
them, though winding herself through their mazes with all kinds of steps, wide and
narrow, nay, even with leaps, and at last half kneeling.
Constant as the movement of a clock, she ran her course; and the strange music, at
each repetition of the tune, gave a new impulse to the dance, recommencing and

again rushing off as at first. Wilhelm was quite led away by this singular spectacle; he
forgot his cares; he followed every movement of the dear little creature, and felt
surprised to see how finely her character unfolded itself as she proceeded in the
dance.
Rigid, sharp, cold, vehement, and in soft postures, stately rather than attractive,—such
was the light in which it showed her. At this moment he experienced at once all the
emotions he had ever felt for Mignon. He longed to incorporate this forsaken being
with his own heart, to take her in his arms, and with a father's love to awaken in her
the joy of existence.
The dance being ended, she rolled the eggs together softly with her foot into a little
heap, left none behind, harmed none; then placed herself beside it, taking the
bandage from her eyes, and concluding her performance with a little bow.
Wilhelm thanked her for having executed, so prettily and unexpectedly, a dance he
had long wished to see. He patted her; was sorry she had tired herself so much. He
promised her a new suit of clothes; to which she vehemently replied, "Thy color!" This,
too, he promised her, though not well knowing what she meant by it. She then lifted
up the eggs, took the carpet under her arm, asked if he wanted any thing further, and
skipped out of the room.
The musician, being questioned, said, that for some time she had taken much trouble
in often singing over the tune of this dance, the well-known fandango, to him, and
training him till he could play it accurately. For his labor she had likewise offered him
some money; which, however, he would not accept.

CHAPTER IX.
After a restless night, which our friend spent, sometimes waking, sometimes
oppressed with unpleasant dreams, seeing Mariana now in all her beauty, now in
woful case, at one time with a child on her arm, then soon bereaved of it, the morning
had scarcely dawned, when Mignon entered with a tailor. She brought some gray cloth
and blue taffeta; signifying in her own way that she wished to have a new jacket and
sailor's trousers, such as she had seen the boys of the town wear, with blue cuffs and
tiers.
Since the loss of Mariana, Wilhelm had laid aside all gay colors. He had used himself to
gray,—the garment of the shades; and only perhaps a sky-blue lining, or little collar of
that dye, in some degree enlivened his sober garb. Mignon, eager to wear his colors,
hurried on the tailor, who engaged to have his work soon ready.
The exercise in dancing and fencing, which our friend took this day with Laertes, did
not prosper in their hands. Indeed, it was soon interrupted by Melina, who came to
show them circumstantially how a little company was now of itself collected, sufficient
to exhibit plays in abundance. He renewed the proposal that Wilhelm should advance
a little money for setting them in motion; which, however, Wilhelm still declined.
Ere long Philina and the girls came in, racketing and laughing as usual. They had now
devised a fresh excursion, for change of place and objects was a pleasure after which
they always longed. To eat daily in a different spot was their highest wish. On this
occasion they proposed a sail.
The boat in which they were to fall down the pleasant windings of the river had
already been engaged by the Pedant. Philina urged them on: the party did not linger,
and were soon on board.
"What shall we take to now?" said Philina, when all had placed themselves upon the
benches.
"The readiest thing," replied Laertes, "were for us to extemporize a play. Let each take
a part that suits his character, and we shall see how we get along."
"Excellent!" said Wilhelm. "In a society where there is no dissimulation, but where
each without disguise pursues the bent of his own humor, elegance and satisfaction
cannot long continue; and, where dissimulation always reigns, they do not enter at all.

It will not be amiss, then, that we take up dissimulation to begin with, and then,
behind our masks, be as candid as we please."
"Yes," said Laertes: "it is on this account that one goes on so pleasantly with women;
they never show themselves in their natural form."
"That is to say," replied Madam Melina, "they are not so vain as men, who conceive
themselves to be always amiable enough, just as nature has produced them."
In the mean time the river led them between pleasant groves and hills, between
gardens and vineyards; and the young women, especially Madam Melina, expressed
their rapture at the landscape. The latter even began to recite, in solemn style, a pretty
poem of the descriptive sort, upon a similar scene of nature; but Philina interrupted
her with the proposal of a law, that no one should presume to speak of any inanimate
object. On the other hand, she zealously urged on their project of an extempore play.
Old Boisterous was to be a half-pay officer; Laertes a fencing-master, taking his
vacation; the Pedant, a Jew; she herself would act a Tyrolese; leaving to the rest to
choose characters according to their several pleasures. They would suppose
themselves to be a party of total strangers to each other, who had just met on board a
merchant-ship.
She immediately began to play her part with the Jew, and a universal cheerfulness
diffused itself among them.
They had not sailed far, when the skipper stopped in his course, asking permission of
the company to take in a person standing on the shore, who had made a sign to him.
"That is just what we needed," cried Philina: "a chance passenger was wanting to
complete the travelling-party."
A handsome man came on board; whom, by his dress and his dignified mien, you
might have taken for a clergyman. He saluted the party, who thanked him in their own
way, and soon made known to him the nature of their game. The stranger immediately
engaged to act the part of a country parson; which, in fact, he accomplished in the
adroitest manner, to the admiration of all,—now admonishing, now telling stories,
showing some weak points, yet never losing their respect.
In the mean time, every one who had made a false step in his part, or swerved from his
character, had been obliged to forfeit a pledge: Philina had gathered them with the

greatest care, and especially threatened the reverend gentleman with many kisses;
though he himself had never been at fault. Melina, on the other hand, was completely
fleeced: shirt-buttons, buckles, every movable about his person, was in Philina's hands.
He was trying to enact an English traveller, and could not by any means get into the
spirit of his part.
Meanwhile the time had passed away very pleasantly. Each had strained his fancy and
his wit to the utmost, and each had garnished his part with agreeable and entertaining
jests. Thus comfortably occupied, they reached the place where they meant to pass
the day; and Wilhelm, going out to walk with the clergyman, as both from his
appearance and late character he persisted in naming him, soon fell into an interesting
conversation.
"I think this practice," said the stranger, "very useful among actors, and even in the
company of friends and acquaintances. It is the best mode of drawing men out of
themselves, and leading them, by a circuitous path, back into themselves again. It
should be a custom with every troop of players to practice in this manner: and the
public would assuredly be no loser if every month an unwritten piece were brought
forward; in which, of course, the players had prepared themselves by several
rehearsals."
"One should not, then," replied our friend, "consider an extempore piece as, strictly
speaking, composed on the spur of the moment, but as a piece, of which the plan,
action, and division of the scenes were given; the filling up of all this being left to the
player."
"Quite right," said the stranger; "and, in regard to this very filling up, such a piece,
were the players once trained to these performances, would profit greatly. Not in
regard to the mere words, it is true; for, by a careful selection of these, the studious
writer may certainly adorn his work; but in regard to the gestures, looks, exclamations,
and every thing of that nature; in short, to the mute and half-mute play of the
dialogue, which seems by degrees fading away among us altogether. There are indeed
some players in Germany whose bodies figure what they think and feel; who by their
silence, their delays, their looks, their slight, graceful movements, can prepare the
audience for a speech, and, by a pleasant sort of pantomime, combine the pauses of
the dialogue with the general whole; but such a practice as this, co-operating with a
happy natural turn, and training it to compete with the author, is far from being so
habitual as, for the comfort of play-going people, were to be desired."

"But will not a happy natural turn," said Wilhelm, "as the first and last requisite, of
itself conduct the player, like every other artist,—nay, perhaps every other man,—to
the lofty mark he aims at?"
"The first and the last, the beginning and the end, it may well be; but, in the middle,
many things will still be wanting to an artist, if instruction, and early instruction too,
have not previously made that of him which he was meant to be: and perhaps for the
man of genius it is worse in this respect than for the man possessed of only common
capabilities; the one may much more easily be misinstructed, and be driven far more
violently into false courses, than the other."
"But," said Wilhelm, "will not genius save itself, not heal the wounds which itself has
inflicted?"
"Only to a very small extent, and with great difficulty," said the other, "or perhaps not
at all. Let no one think that he can conquer the first impressions of his youth. If he has
grown up in enviable freedom, surrounded with beautiful and noble objects, in
constant intercourse with worthy men; if his masters have taught him what he needed
first to know, for comprehending more easily what followed; if he has never learned
any thing which he requires to unlearn; if his first operations have been so guided,
that, without altering any of his habits, he can more easily produce what is excellent in
future,—then such a one will lead a purer, more perfect and happier, life, than another
man who has wasted the force of his youth in opposition and error. A great deal is said
and written about education; yet I meet with very few who can comprehend, and
transfer to practice, this simple yet vast idea, which includes within itself all others
connected with the subject."
"That may well be true," said Wilhelm; "for the generality of men are limited enough in
their conceptions to suppose that every other should be fashioned by education,
according to the pattern of themselves. Happy, then, are those whom Fate takes
charge of, and educates according to their several natures!"
"Fate," said the other, smiling, "is an excellent but most expensive schoolmaster. In all
cases, I would rather trust to the reason of a human tutor. Fate, for whose wisdom I
entertain all imaginable reverence, often finds in Chance, by which it works, an
instrument not over manageable. At least the latter very seldom seems to execute
precisely and accurately what the former had determined."

"You seem to express a very singular opinion," said Wilhelm.
"Not at all," replied the other. "Most of what happens in the world confirms my
opinion. Do not many incidents at their commencement show some mighty purport,
and generally terminate in something paltry?"
"You mean to jest."
"And as to what concerns the individual man," pursued the other, "is it not so with this
likewise? Suppose Fate had appointed one to be a good player; and why should it not
provide us with good players as well as other good things? Chance would perhaps
conduct the youth into some puppet-show, where, at such an early age, he could not
help taking interest in what was tasteless and despicable, reckoning insipidities
endurable or even pleasing, and thus corrupting and misdirecting his primary
impressions,—impressions which can never be effaced, and whose influence, in spite
of all our efforts, cling to us in some degree to the very last."
"What makes you think of puppet-shows?" said Wilhelm, not without some
consternation.
"It was an accidental instance: if it does not please you, we shall take another. Suppose
Fate had appointed any one to be a great painter, and it pleased Chance that he should
pass his youth in sooty huts, in barns and stables: do you think that such a man would
ever be enabled to exalt himself to purity, to nobleness, to freedom of soul? The more
keenly he may in his youth have seized on the impure, and tried in his own manner to
ennoble it, the more powerfully in the remainder of his life will it be revenged on him;
because, while he was endeavoring to conquer it, his whole being has become
inseparably combined with it. Whoever spends his early years in mean and pitiful
society, though at an after period he may have the choice of better, will yet constantly
look back with longing towards that which he enjoyed of old, and which has left its
impression blended with the memory of all his young and unreturning pleasures."
From conversation of this sort, it is easy to imagine, the rest of the company had
gradually withdrawn. Philina, in particular, had stepped aside at the very outset.
Wilhelm and his comrade now rejoined them by a cross-path. Philina brought out her
forfeits, and they had to be redeemed in many different ways. During which business,
the stranger, by the most ingenious devices, and by his frank participation in their
sports, recommended himself much to all the party, and particularly to the ladies; and

thus, amid joking, singing, kissing, and railleries of all sorts, the hours passed away in
the most pleasant manner.

CHAPTER X.
When our friends began to think of going home, they looked about them for their
clergyman; but he had vanished, and was nowhere to be found.
"It is not polite in the man, who otherwise displayed good breeding," said Madam
Melina, "to desert a company that welcomed him so kindly, without taking leave."
"I have all the time been thinking," said Laertes, "where I can have seen this singular
man before. I fully intended to ask him about it at parting."
"I, too, had the same feeling," said Wilhelm; "and certainly I should not have let him
go, till he had told us something more about his circumstances. I am much mistaken if I
have not ere now spoken with him somewhere."
"And you may in truth," said Philina, "be mistaken there. This person seems to have
the air of an acquaintance, because he looks like a man, and not like Jack or Kit."
"What is this?" said Laertes. "Do not we, too, look like men?"
"I know what I am saying," cried Philina; "and, if you cannot understand me, never
mind. In the end my words will be found to require no commentary."
Two coaches now drove up. All praised the attention of Laertes, who had ordered
them. Philina, with Madam Melina, took her place opposite to Wilhelm: the rest
bestowed themselves as they best could. Laertes rode back on Wilhelm's horse, which
had likewise been brought out.
Philina was scarcely seated in the coach, when she began to sing some pretty songs,
and gradually led the conversation to some stories, which she said might be
successfully treated in the form of dramas. By this cunning turn, she very soon put her
young friend into his finest humor: from the wealth of his living imaginative store, he
forthwith constructed a complete play, with all its acts, scenes, characters, and plots. It
was thought proper to insert a few catches and songs; they composed them; and
Philina, who entered into every part of it, immediately fitted them with well-known
tunes, and sang them on the spot.

It was one of her beautiful, most beautiful, days: she had skill to enliven our friend
with all manner of diverting wiles; he felt in spirits such as he had not for many a
month enjoyed.
Since that shocking discovery had torn him from the side of Mariana, he had continued
true to his vow to be on his guard against the encircling arms of woman; to avoid the
faithless sex; to lock up his inclinations, his sweet wishes, in his own bosom. The
conscientiousness with which he had observed this vow gave his whole nature a secret
nourishment; and, as his heart could not remain without affection, some loving
sympathy had now become a want with him. He went along once more, as if environed
by the first cloudy glories of youth; his eye fixed joyfully on every charming object, and
never had his judgment of a lovely form been more favorable. How dangerous, in such
a situation, this wild girl must have been to him, is but too easy to conceive.
Arrived at home, they found Wilhelm's chamber all ready to receive them; the chairs
set right for a public reading; in midst of them the table, on which the punch-bowl was
in due time to take its place.
The German chivalry-plays were new at this period, and had just excited the attention
and the inclination of the public. Old Boisterous had brought one of this sort with him:
the reading of it had already been determined on. They all sat down; Wilhelm took
possession of the pamphlet, and began to read.
The harnessed knights, the ancient keeps, the true-heartedness, honesty, and
downrightness, but especially the independence of the acting characters, were
received with the greatest approbation. The reader did his utmost, and the audience
gradually mounted into rapture. Between the third and fourth acts, the punch arrived
in an ample bowl; and, there being much fighting and drinking in the piece itself,
nothing was more natural than that, on every such occurrence, the company should
transport themselves into the situation of the heroes, should flourish and strike along
with them, and drink long life to their favorites among the dramatis personæ.
Each individual of the party was inflamed with the noblest fire of national spirit. How it
gratified this German company to be poetically entertained, according to their own
character, on stuff of their own manufacture! In particular, the vaults and caverns, the
ruined castles, the moss and hollow trees, but above all the nocturnal gypsy scenes,
and the Secret Tribunal, produced a quite incredible effect. Every actor now figured to
himself how, erelong, in helm and harness, he; every actress how, with a monstrous

spreading ruff, she,—would present their Germanship before the public. Each would
appropriate to himself without delay some name taken from the piece or from German
history; and Madam Melina declared that the son or daughter she was then expecting
should not be christened otherwise than by the name of Adelbert or of Mathilde.
Towards the fifth act, the approbation became more impetuous and louder; and at
last, when the hero actually trampled down his oppressor, and the tyrant met his
doom, the ecstasy increased to such a height, that all averred they had never passed
such happy moments. Melina, whom the liquor had inspired, was the noisiest: and
when the second bowl was emptied, and midnight near, Laertes swore through thick
and thin, that no living mortal was worthy ever more to put these glasses to his lips;
and, so swearing, he pitched his own right over his head, through a window-pane, out
into the street. The rest followed his example; and notwithstanding the protestations
of the landlord, who came running in at the noise, the punch-bowl itself, never after
this festivity to be polluted by unholy drink, was dashed into a thousand shreds.
Philina, whose exhilaration was the least noticed,—the other two girls by that time
having laid themselves upon the sofa in no very elegant positions,—maliciously
encouraged her companions in their tumult. Madam Melina recited some spirit-stirring
poems; and her husband, not too amiable in the uproar, began to cavil at the
insufficient preparation of the punch, declaring that he could arrange an
entertainment altogether in a different style, and at last becoming sulkier and louder
as Laertes commanded silence, till the latter, without much consideration, threw the
fragments of the punch-bowl about his head, and thereby not a little deepened the
confusion.
Meanwhile the town-guard had arrived, and were demanding admission to the house.
Wilhelm, much heated by his reading, though he had drunk but little, had enough to
do, with the landlord's help, to content these people by money and good words, and
afterwards to get the various members of his party sent home in that unseemly case.
On coming back, overpowered with sleep and full of chagrin, he threw himself upon
his bed without undressing; and nothing could exceed his disgust, when, opening his
eyes next morning, he looked out with dull sight upon the devastations of the by-gone
day, and saw the uncleanness, and the many bad effects, of which that ingenious,
lively, and well-intentioned poetical performance had been the cause.

CHAPTER XI.
After a short consideration, he called the landlord, and bade him mark to his account
both the damage and the regular charge. At the same time he learned, not without
vexation, that his horse had been so hard ridden by Laertes last night, that, in all
probability, it was foundered, as they term it; the farrier having little hope of its
recovering.
A salute from Philina, which she threw him from her window, restored him in some
degree to a more cheerful humor: he went forthwith into the nearest shop to buy her
a little present, which, in return for the powder-knife, he still owed her; and it must be
owned, that, in selecting his gift, he did not keep himself within the limits of
proportional value. He not only purchased her a pair of earrings, but added likewise a
hat and neckerchief, and some other little articles, which he had seen her lavishly
throw from her on the first day of their acquaintance.
Madam Melina, happening to observe him as he was delivering his presents, took an
opportunity before breakfast to rate him very earnestly about his inclination for this
girl; at which he felt the more astonished, the less he thought it merited. He swore
solemnly, that he had never once entertained the slightest notion of attaching himself
to such a person, whose whole manner of proceeding was well known to him. He
excused himself as well as possible for his friendly and polite conduct towards her, yet
did not by any means content Madam Melina, whose spite grew ever more
determined, as she could not but observe that the flatteries, by which she had
acquired for herself a sort of partial regard from our friend, were not sufficient to
defend this conquest from the attacks of a livery, younger, and more gifted rival.
As they sat down to table, her husband joined them, likewise in a very fretful humor;
which he was beginning to display on many little things, when the landlord entered to
announce a player on the harp. "You will certainly," he said, "find pleasure in the music
and the songs of this man: no one who hears him can forbear to admire him, and
bestow something on him."
"Let him go about his business," said Melina: "I am any thing but in a trim for hearing
fiddlers, and we have singers constantly among ourselves disposed to gain a little by
their talent." He accompanied these words with a sarcastic side-look at Philina: she
understood his meaning, and immediately prepared to punish him, by taking up the

cause of the harper. Turning towards Wilhelm, "Shall we not hear the man?" said she:
"shall we do nothing to save ourselves from this miserable ennui?"
Melina was going to reply, and the strife would have grown keener, had not the person
it related to at that moment entered. Wilhelm saluted him, and beckoned him to come
near.
The figure of this singular guest set the whole party in astonishment: he had found a
chair before any one took heart to ask him a question, or make any observation. His
bald crown was encircled by a few gray hairs, and a pair of large blue eyes looked out
softly from beneath his long white eyebrows. To a nose of beautiful proportions was
subjoined a flowing, hoary beard, which did not hide the fine shape and position of his
lips; and a long dark-brown garment wrapped his thin body from the neck to the feet.
He began to prelude on the harp, which he had placed before him.
The sweet tones which he drew from his instrument very soon inspirited the company.
"You can sing, too, my good old man," said Philina.
"Give us something that shall entertain the spirit and the heart as well as the senses,"
said Wilhelm. "The instrument should but accompany the voice; for tunes and
melodies without words and meaning seem to me like butterflies or finely variegated
birds, which hover round us in the air, which we could wish to catch and make our
own: whereas song is like a blessed genius that exalts us towards heaven, and allures
the better self in us to attend him."
The old man looked at Wilhelm, then aloft, then gave some trills upon his harp, and
began his song. It contained a eulogy on minstrelsy,—described the happiness of
minstrels, and reminded men to honor them. He produced his song with so much life
and truth, that it seemed as if he had composed it at the moment, for this special
occasion. Wilhelm could scarcely refrain from clasping him in his arms: but the fear of
awakening a peal of laughter detained him in his chair; for the rest were already in
half-whispers making sundry very shallow observations, and debating if the harper was
a Papist or a Jew.
When asked about the author of the song, the man gave no distinct reply; declaring
only that he was rich in songs, and anxious that they should please. Most of the party
were now merry and joyful; even Melina was grown frank in his way; and, whilst they

talked and joked together, the old man began to sing the praise of social life in the
most sprightly style. He described the loveliness of unity and courtesy, in soft, soothing
tones. Suddenly his music became cold, harsh, and jarring, as he turned to deplore
repulsive selfishness, short-sighted enmity, and baleful division; and every heart
willingly threw off those galling fetters, while, borne on the wings of a piercing melody,
he launched forth in praise of peacemakers, and sang the happiness of souls, that,
having parted, meet again in love.
Scarcely had he ended, when Wilhelm cried to him, "Whoever thou art, that as a
helping spirit comest to us with a voice which blesses and revives, accept my reverence
and my thanks! Feel that we all admire thee, and confide in us if thou wantest any
thing."
The old man spoke not: he threw his fingers softly across the strings, then struck more
sharply, and sang,—
"'What notes are those without the wall,Across the portal sounding?Let's have the
music in our hall,Back from its roof rebounding.'So spoke the king, the henchman
flies:His answer heard, the monarch cries,'Bring in that ancient minstrel.'
'Hail, gracious king! each noble knight,Each lovely dame, I greet you!What glittering
stars salute my sight!What heart unmoved may meet you!Such lordly pomp is not for
me,Far other scenes my eyes must see:Yet deign to list my harping.'
The singer turns him to his art,A thrilling strain he raises:Each warrior hears with
glowing heart,And on his loved one gazes.The king, who liked his playing
well,Commands, for such a kindly spell,A golden chain be given him.
'The golden chain give not to me;Thy boldest knight may wear it,Who, 'cross the
battle's purple sea,On lion breast may bear it:Or let it be thy chancellor's prize,Amid
his heaps to feast his eyes;Its yellow glance will please him.'
"I sing but as the linnet sings,That on the green bough dwelleth;A rich reward his music
brings,As from his throat it swelleth:Yet might I ask, I'd ask of thineOne sparkling
draught of purest wine,To drink it here before you.'
He viewed the wine: he quaffed it up.'O draught of sweetest savor!O happy house,
where such a cupIs thought a little favor!If well you fare, remember me,And thank kind
Heaven, from envy free,As now for this I thank you.'"

When the harper, on finishing his song, took up a glass of wine that stood poured out
for him, and, turning with a friendly mien to his entertainers, drank it off, a buzz of
joyful approbation rose from all the party. They clapped hands, and wished him health
from that glass, and strength to his aged limbs. He sang a few other ballads, exciting
more and more hilarity among the company.
"Old man," said Philina, "dost thou know the tune, 'The shepherd decked him for the
dance'?"
"Oh, yes!" said he: "if you will sing the words, I shall not fail for my part of it."
Philina then stood up, and held herself in readiness. The old man commenced the
tune; and she sang a song, which we cannot impart to our readers, lest they might
think it insipid, or perhaps undignified.
Meanwhile the company were growing merrier and merrier: they had already emptied
several flasks of wine, and were now beginning to get very loud. But our friend, having
fresh in his remembrance the bad consequences of their late exhilaration, determined
to break up the sitting; he slipped into the old man's hand a liberal remuneration for
his trouble, the rest did something likewise; they gave him leave to go and take repose,
promising themselves another entertainment from his skill in the evening.
When he had retired, our friend said to Philina, "In this favorite song of yours I
certainly find no merit, either moral or poetical; yet if you were to bring forward any
proper composition on the stage, with the same arch simplicity, the same propriety
and gracefulness, I should engage that strong and universal approbation would be the
result."
"Yes," said Philina: "it would be a charming thing indeed to warm one's self at ice."
"After all," said Wilhelm, "this old man might put many a player to the blush. Did you
notice how correctly the dramatic part of his ballads was expressed? I maintain there
was more living true representation in his singing than in many of our starched
characters upon the stage. You would take the acting of many plays for a narrative,
and you might ascribe to these musical narratives a sensible presence."
"You are hardly just," replied Laertes. "I pretend to no great skill, either as a player or
as a singer; yet I know well enough, that when music guides the movements of the
body, at once affording to them animation and a scale to measure it; when

declamation and expression are furnished me by the composer,—I feel quite a
different man from what I do when, in prose dramas, I have all this to create for
myself,—have both gesture and declamation to invent, and am, perhaps, disturbed in
it, too, by the awkwardness of some partner in the dialogue."
"Thus much I know," said Melina: "the man certainly puts us to the blush in one point,
and that a main point. The strength of his talent is shown by the profit he derives from
it. Even us, who perhaps erelong shall be embarrassed where to get a meal, he
persuades to share our pittance with him. He has skill enough to wile the money from
our pockets with an old song,—the money that we should have used to find ourselves
employment. So pleasant an affair is it to squander the means which might procure
subsistence to one's self and others."
This remark gave the conversation not the most delightful turn. Wilhelm, for whom the
reproach was peculiarly intended, replied with some heat; and Melina, at no time over
studious of delicacy and politeness, explained his grievances at last in words more
plain than courteous. "It is now a fortnight," said he, "since we looked at the theatrical
machinery and wardrobe which is lying pawned here: the whole might be redeemed
for a very tolerable sum. You then gave me hopes that you would lend me so much;
and hitherto I do not see that you have thought more of the matter, or come any
nearer a determination. Had you then consented, we should ere now have been under
way. Nor has your intention to leave the place been executed, nor has your money in
the mean time been spared: at least there are people who have always skill to
create opportunities for scattering it faster and faster away."
Such upbraidings, not altogether undeserved, touched Wilhelm to the quick. He
replied with keenness, nay, with anger; and, as the company rose to part, he took hold
of the door, and gave them not obscurely to understand that he would no longer
continue with such unfriendly and ungrateful people. He hastened down, in no kindly
humor, and seated himself upon the stone bench without the door of his inn; not
observing, that, first out of mirth, then out of spleen, he had drunk more wine than
usual.

CHAPTER XII.
After a short time, which he passed sitting looking out before him, disquieted by many
thoughts, Philina came singing and skipping along through the front door. She sat
down by him, nay, we might almost say, on him, so close did she press herself towards
him: she leaned upon his shoulders, began playing with his hair, patted him, and gave
him the best words in the world. She begged of him to stay with them, and not leave
her alone in that company, or she must die of tedium: she could not live any longer in
the same house with Melina, and had come over to lodge in the other inn for that
reason.
He tried in vain to satisfy her with denials,—to make her understand that he neither
could nor would remain any longer. She did not cease with her entreaties; nay,
suddenly she threw her arm round his neck, and kissed him with the liveliest
expression of fondness.
"Are you mad, Philina?" cried Wilhelm, endeavoring to disengage himself; "to make
the open street the scene of such caresses, which I nowise merit! Let me go! I can not
and I will not stay."
"And I will hold thee fast," said she, "and kiss thee here on the open street, and kiss
thee till thou promise what I want. I shall die of laughing," she continued: "by this
familiarity the good people here must take me for thy wife of four weeks' standing;
and husbands, who witness this touching scene, will commend me to their wives as a
pattern of childlike, simple tenderness."

Some persons were just then going by: she caressed him in the most graceful way; and
he, to avoid giving scandal, was constrained to play the part of the patient husband.
Then she made faces at the people, when their backs were turned, and, in the wildest
humor, continued to commit all sorts of improprieties, till at last he was obliged to
promise that he would not go that day, or the morrow, or the next day.
"You are a true clod!" said she, quitting him; "and I am but a fool to spend so much
kindness on you." She arose with some vexation, and walked a few steps, then turned
round laughing, and cried, "I believe it is just that, after all, that makes me so crazy
about thee. I will but go and seek my knitting-needles and my stocking, that I may have

something to do. Stay there, and let me find the stone man still upon the stone bench
when I come back."
She cast a sparkling glance on him, and went into the house. He had no call to follow
her; on the contrary, her conduct had excited fresh aversion in him; yet he rose from
the bench to go after her, not well knowing why.
He was just entering the door, when Melina passed by, and spoke to him in a
respectful tone, asking his pardon for the somewhat too harsh expressions he had
used in their late discussion. "You will not take it ill of me," continued he, "if I appear
perhaps too fretful in my present circumstances. The charge of providing for a wife,
perhaps soon for a child, forbids me from day to day to live at peace, or spend my time
as you may do, in the enjoyment of pleasant feelings. Consider, I pray you, and, if
possible, do put me in possession of that stage machinery that is lying here. I shall not
be your debtor long, and I shall be obliged to you while I live."
Our friend, unwilling to be kept upon the threshold, over which an irresistible impulse
was drawing him at that moment to Philina, answered, with an absent mind, eager to
be gone, and surprised into a transient feeling of good will, "If I can make you happy
and contented by doing this, I will hesitate no longer. Go you and put every thing to
rights. I shall be prepared this evening, or to-morrow morning, to pay the money." He
then gave his hand to Melina in confirmation of his promise, and was very glad to see
him hastily proceed along the street; but, alas! his entrance, which he now thought
sure, was a second time prohibited, and more disagreeably than at first.
A young man, with a bundle on his back, came walking fast along the street, and
advanced to Wilhelm, who at once recognized him for Friedrich.
"Here am I again!" cried he, looking with his large blue eyes joyfully up and down, over
all the windows of the house. "Where is Mamsell? Devil take me, if I can stroll about
the world any longer without seeing her!"
The landlord, joining them at this instant, replied that she was above; Friedrich, with a
few bounds, was up stairs; and Wilhelm continued standing, as if rooted to the
threshold. At the first instant he was tempted to pluck the younker back, and drag him
down by the hair; then all at once the spasm of a sharp jealousy stopped the current of
his spirits and ideas; and, as he gradually recovered from this stupefaction, there came

over him a splenetic fit of restlessness, a general discomfort, such as he had never felt
in his life before.
He went up to his room, and found Mignon busy writing. For some time the creature
had been laboring with great diligence in writing every thing she knew by heart, giving
always to her master and friend the papers to correct. She was indefatigable, and of
good comprehension; but still, her letters were irregular, and her lines crooked. Here,
too, the body seemed to contradict the mind. In his usual moods, Wilhelm took no
small pleasure in the child's attention; but, at the present moment, he regarded little
what she showed him,—a piece of neglect which she felt the more acutely, as on this
occasion she conceived her work had been accomplished with peculiar success.
Wilhelm's unrest drove him up and down the passages of the house, and finally again
to the street-door. A rider was just prancing towards it,—a man of good appearance,
of middle age, and a brisk, contented look. The landlord ran to meet him, holding out
his hand as to an old acquaintance. "Ay, Herr Stallmeister," cried he, "have we the
pleasure to see you again?"
"I am only just going to bait with you," replied the stranger, "and then along to the
estate, to get matters put in order as soon as possible. The count is coming over tomorrow with his lady; they mean to stay a while to entertain the Prince von —— in
their best style: he intends to fix his headquarters in this neighborhood for some time."
"It is pity," said the landlord, "that you cannot stop with us: we have good company in
the house." The hostler came running out, and took the horse from the Stallmeister,
who continued talking in the door with the landlord, and now and then giving a look at
Wilhelm.
Our friend, observing that he formed the topic of their conversation, went away, and
walked up and down the streets.

CHAPTER XIII.
In the restless vexation of his present humor, it came into his head to go and see the
old harper; hoping by his music to scare away the evil spirits that tormented him. On
asking for the man, he was directed to a mean public house, in a remote corner of the
little town; and, having mounted up-stairs there to the very garret, his ear caught the
fine twanging of the harp coming from a little room before him. They were heartmoving, mournful tones, accompanied by a sad and dreary singing. Wilhelm glided to
the door: and as the good old man was performing a sort of voluntary, the few stanzas
of which, sometimes chanted, sometimes in recitative, were repeated more than once,
our friend succeeded, after listening for a while, in gathering nearly this:—
"Who never ate his bread with tears,Through nights of grief who, weeping, neverSat
on his bed, midst pangs and fears,Can, heavenly powers, not know you ever.
Ye lead us forth into this life,Where comfort soon by guilt is banished,Abandon us to
tortures, strife;For on this earth all guilt is punished."—Editor's Version.
The heart-sick, plaintive sound of this lament pierced deep into the soul of the hearer.
It seemed to him as if the old man were often stopped from proceeding by his tears:
his harp would alone be heard for a time, till his voice again joined it in low, broken
tones. Wilhelm stood by the door; he was much moved; the mourning of this stranger
had again opened the avenues of his heart; he could not resist the claim of sympathy,
or restrain the tears which this woe-begone complaint at last called forth. All the pains
that pressed upon his soul seemed now at once to loosen from their hold: he
abandoned himself without reserve to the feelings of the moment. Pushing up the
door, he stood before the harper. The old man was sitting on a mean bed, the only
seat, or article of furniture, which his miserable room afforded.
"What feelings thou hast awakened in me, good old man!" exclaimed he. "All that was
lying frozen at my heart thou hast melted, and put in motion. Let me not disturb thee,
but continue, in solacing thy own sorrows, to confer happiness upon a friend." The
harper was about to rise, and say something; but Wilhelm hindered him, for he had
noticed in the morning that the old man did not like to speak. He sat down by him on
the straw bed.
The old man wiped his eyes, and asked, with a friendly smile, "How came you hither? I
meant to wait upon you in the evening again."

"We are more quiet here," said Wilhelm. "Sing to me what thou pleasest, what accords
with thy own mood of mind, only proceed as if I were not by. It seems to me, that today thou canst not fail to suit me. I think thee very happy, that, in solitude, thou canst
employ and entertain thyself so pleasantly; that, being everywhere a stranger, thou
findest in thy own heart the most agreeable society."
The old man looked upon his strings; and after touching them softly, by way of
prelude, he commenced and sang,—
"Who longs in solitude to live,Ah! soon his wish will gain:Men hope and love, men get
and give,And leave him to his pain.Yes, leave me to my moan!When from my bedYou
all are fled,I still am not alone.
The lover glides with footstep light:His love, is she not waiting there?So glides to meet
me, day and night,In solitude my care,In solitude my woe:True solitude I then shall
knowWhen lying in my grave,When lying in my grave,And grief has let me go."
We might describe with great prolixity, and yet fail to express the charms of, the
singular conversation which Wilhelm carried on with this wayfaring stranger. To every
observation our friend addressed to him, the old man, with the nicest accordance,
answered in some melody, which awakened all the cognate emotions, and opened a
wide field to the imagination.
Whoever has happened to be present at a meeting of certain devout people, who
conceive, that, in a state of separation from the Church, they can edify each other in a
purer, more affecting, and more spiritual manner, may form to himself some
conception of the present scene. He will recollect how the leader of the meeting would
append to his words some verse of a song, that raised the soul till, as he wished, she
took wing; how another of the flock would erelong subjoin, in a different tune, some
verse of a different song; and to this again a third would link some verse of a third
song,—by which means the kindred ideas of the songs to which the verses belonged
were indeed suggested, yet each passage by its new combination became new and
individualized, as if it had been first composed that moment; and thus from a wellknown circle of ideas, from well-known songs and sayings, there was formed for that
particular society, in that particular time, an original whole, by means of which their
minds were animated, strengthened, and refreshed. So, likewise, did the old man edify
his guest: by known and unknown songs and passages, he brought feelings near and

distant, emotions sleeping and awake, pleasant and painful, into a circulation, from
which, in Wilhelm's actual state, the best effects might be anticipated.

CHAPTER XIV.
Accordingly, in walking back, he began to think with greater earnestness than ever on
his present situation: he had reached home with the firm purpose of altering it, when
the landlord disclosed to him, by way of secret, that Mademoiselle Philina had made a
conquest of the count's Stallmeister, who, after executing his commission at his
master's estate, had returned in the greatest haste, and was even now partaking of a
good supper with her up in her chamber.
At this very moment Melina came in with a notary: they went into Wilhelm's chamber
together, where the latter, though with some hesitation, made his promise good; gave
a draft of three hundred crowns to Melina, who, handing it to the lawyer, received in
return a note acknowledging the sale of the whole theatrical apparatus, and engaging
to deliver it next morning.
Scarcely had they parted, when Wilhelm heard a cry of horror rising from some quarter
of the house. He caught the sound of a young voice, uttering menacing and furious
tones, which were ever and anon choked by immoderate weeping and howling. He
observed this frantic noise move hastily from above, go past his door, and down to the
lower part of the house.
Curiosity enticing our friend to follow it, he found Friedrich in a species of delirium. The
boy was weeping, grinding his teeth, stamping with his feet, threatening with clenched
fists: he appeared beside himself from fury and vexation. Mignon was standing
opposite him, looking on with astonishment. The landlord, in some degree, explained
this phenomenon.
The boy, he said, being well received at his return by Philina, seemed quite merry and
contented: he had kept singing and jumping about, till the time when Philina grew
acquainted with theStallmeister. Then, however, this half-grown younker had begun to
show his indignation, to slam the doors, and run up and down in the highest dudgeon.
Philina had ordered him to wait at table that evening, upon which he had grown still
sulkier and more indignant; till at last, carrying up a plate with a ragout, instead of
setting it upon the table, he had thrown the whole between Mademoiselle and her
guest, who were sitting moderately close together at the time: and the Stallmeister,
after two or three hearty cuffs, had then kicked him out of the room. He, the landlord,
had himself helped to clean both of them; and certainly their clothes had suffered
much.

On hearing of the good effect of his revenge, the boy began to laugh aloud, whilst the
tears were still running down his cheeks. He heartily rejoiced for a time, till the
disgrace which he had suffered from the stronger party once more came into his head,
and he began afresh to howl and threaten.
Wilhelm stood meditating, and ashamed at this spectacle. It reflected back to him his
own feelings, in coarser and exaggerated features: he, too, was inflamed with a fierce
jealousy; and, had not decency restrained him, he would willingly have satisfied his
wild humor; with malicious spleen would have abused the object of his passion,
and called out his rival; he could have crushed in pieces all the people round him; they
seemed as if standing there but to vex him.
Laertes also had come in, and heard the story: he roguishly spurred on the irritated
boy, who was now asserting with oaths that he would make the Stallmeister give him
satisfaction; that he had never yet let any injury abide with him; that, should the man
refuse, there were other ways of taking vengeance.
This was the very business for Laertes. He went up stairs, with a solemn countenance,
to call out the Stallmeister in the boy's name.
"This is a pleasant thing," said the Stallmeister: "such a joke as this I had scarcely
promised myself to-night." They went down, and Philina followed them. "My son," said
the Stallmeister to Friedrich, "thou art a brave lad, and I do not hesitate to fight thee.
Only, as our years and strength are unequal, and the attempt a little dangerous on that
account, I propose a pair of foils in preference to other weapons. We can rub the
buttons of them with a piece of chalk; and whoever marks upon the other's coat the
first or the most thrusts, shall be held the victor, and be treated by the other with the
best wine that can be had in town."
Laertes decided that the proposition might be listened to: Friedrich obeyed him, as his
tutor. The foils were produced: Philina took a seat, went on with her knitting, and
looked at the contending parties with the greatest peace of mind.
The Stallmeister, who could fence very prettily, was complaisant enough to spare his
adversary, and to let a few chalk scores be marked upon his coat; after which the two
embraced, and wine was ordered. The Stallmeister took the liberty of asking Friedrich's
parentage and history; and Friedrich told him a long story, which had often been

repeated already, and which, at some other opportunity, we purpose communicating
to our readers.
To Wilhelm, in the mean time, this contest completed the representation of his own
state of mind. He could not but perceive that he would willingly have taken up a foil
against theStallmeister,—a sword still more willingly, though evidently much his
inferior in the science of defence. Yet he deigned not to cast one look on Philina; he
was on his guard against any word or movement that could possibly betray his
feelings: and, after having once or twice done justice to the health of the duellists, he
hastened to his own room, where a thousand painful thoughts came pressing round
him.
He called to memory the time when his spirit, rich in hope, and full of boundless aims,
was raised aloft, and encircled with the liveliest enjoyments of every kind as with its
proper element. He now clearly saw, that of late he had fallen into a broken,
wandering path, where, if he tasted, it was but in drops what he once quaffed in
unrestricted measure. But he could not clearly see what insatiable want it was that
nature had made the law of his being, and how this want had been only set on edge,
half satisfied, and misdirected by the circumstances of his life.
It will not surprise us, therefore, that, in considering his situation, and laboring to
extricate himself, he fell into the greatest perplexity. It was not enough, that by his
friendship for Laertes, his attachment to Philina, his concern for Mignon, he had been
detained longer than was proper in a place and a society where he could cherish his
darling inclination, content his wishes as it were by stealth, and, without proposing any
object, again pursue his early dreams. These ties he believed himself possessed of
force enough to break asunder: had there been nothing more to hold him, he could
have gone at once. But, only a few moments ago, he had entered into money
transactions with Melina: he had seen that mysterious old man, the enigma of whose
history he longed with unspeakable desire to clear. Yet of this too, after much
balancing of reasons, he at length determined, or thought he had determined, that it
should not keep him back. "I must go." He threw himself into a chair: he felt greatly
moved. Mignon came in, and asked whether she might help to undress him. Her
manner was still and shy: it had grieved her to the quick to be so abruptly dismissed by
him before.
Nothing is more touching than the first disclosure of a love which has been nursed in
silence, of a faith grown strong in secret, and which at last comes forth in the hour of

need, and reveals itself to him who formerly has reckoned it of small account. The bud,
which had been closed so long and firmly, was now ripe to burst its swathings; and
Wilhelm's heart could never have been readier to welcome the impressions of
affection.
She stood before him, and noticed his disquietude. "Master!" she cried, "if thou art
unhappy, what will become of Mignon?"—"Dear little creature," said he, taking her
hands, "thou, too, art part of my anxieties. I must go hence." She looked at his eyes,
glistening with restrained tears, and knelt down with vehemence before him. He kept
her hands: she laid her head upon his knees, and remained quite still. He played with
her hair, patted her, and spoke kindly to her. She continued motionless for a
considerable time. At last he felt a sort of palpitating movement in her, which began
very softly, and then by degrees, with increasing violence, diffused itself over all her
frame. "What ails thee, Mignon?" cried he: "What ails thee?" She raised her little head,
looked at him, and all at once laid her hand upon her heart, with the countenance of
one repressing the utterance of pain. He raised her up, and she fell upon his breast: he
pressed her towards him, and kissed her. She replied not by any pressure of the hand,
by any motion whatever. She held firmly against her heart, and all at once gave a cry,
which was accompanied by spasmodic movements of the body. She started up, and
immediately fell down before him, as if broken in every joint. It was an excruciating
moment. "My child!" cried he, raising her up, and clasping her fast, "my child, what ails
thee?" The palpitations continued, spreading from the heart over all the lax and
powerless limbs: she was merely hanging in his arms. All at once she again became
quite stiff, like one enduring the sharpest corporeal agony; and soon with a new
vehemence all her frame once more became alive; and she threw herself about his
neck, like a bent spring that is closing; while in her soul, as it were, a strong rent took
place, and at the same moment a stream of tears flowed from her shut eyes into his
bosom. He held her fast. She wept, and no tongue can express the force of these tears.
Her long hair had loosened, and was hanging down before her: it seemed as if her
whole being was melting incessantly into a brook of tears. Her rigid limbs were again
become relaxed; her inmost soul was pouring itself forth; in the wild confusion of the
moment Wilhelm was afraid she would dissolve in his arms, and leave nothing there
for him to grasp. He held her faster and faster. "My child!" cried he, "my child! thou art
indeed mine, if that word can comfort thee. Thou art mine! I will keep thee, I will never
forsake thee!" Her tears continued flowing. At last she raised herself: a faint gladness
shone upon her face. "My father!" cried she, "thou wilt not forsake me? Wilt be my
father? I am thy child!"

Softly, at this moment, the harp began to sound before the door: the old man brought
his most affecting songs as an evening offering to our friend, who, holding his child
ever faster in his arms, enjoyed the most pure and undescribable felicity.

BOOK III.
CHAPTER I.
"Dost know the land where citrons, lemons, grow,Gold oranges 'neath dusky foliage
glow,From azure sky are blowing breezes soft,The myrtles still, the laurel stands
aloft?'Tis there! 'tis there!I would with thee, O my beloved one, go!
Dost know the house, its roofs do columns bear,The hall with splendor bright, the
chambers glare?Therein stand marble forms, and look at me:What is't, poor child, that
they have done to thee?Dost know that house?'Tis there! 'tis there!I would with thee,
O my protector, go!
Dost know the mount, whose path with clouds is fraught,Where by the mule through
mist the way is sought,Where dwell in caves the dragon's ancient brood,Where falls
the rock, and over it the flood,—Dost know that mount?'Tis there! 'tis there!Does lead
our road: O father, let us go!"—Editor's Version.
Next morning, on looking for Mignon about the house, Wilhelm did not find her, but
was informed that she had gone out early with Melina, who had risen betimes to
receive the wardrobe and other apparatus of his theatre.
After the space of some hours, Wilhelm heard the sound of music before his door. At
first he thought it was the harper come again to visit him; but he soon distinguished
the tones of a cithern, and the voice which began to sing was Mignon's. Wilhelm
opened the door: the child came in, and sang him the song we have just given above.
The music and general expression of it pleased our friend extremely, though he could
not understand all the words. He made her once more repeat the stanzas, and explain
them: he wrote them down, and translated them into his native language. But the
originality of its turns he could imitate only from afar: its childlike innocence of
expression vanished from it in the process of reducing its broken phraseology to
uniformity, and combining its disjointed parts. The charm of the tune, moreover, was
entirely incomparable.
She began every verse in a stately and solemn manner, as if she wished to draw
attention towards something wonderful, as if she had something weighty to
communicate. In the third line, her tones became deeper and gloomier; the words,
"Dost know?" were uttered with a show of mystery and eager circumspectness; in "'Tis

there! 'tis there!" lay an irresistible longing; and her "Let us go!" she modified at each
repetition, so that now it appeared to entreat and implore, now to impel and
persuade.
On finishing her song for the second time, she stood silent for a moment, looked
keenly at Wilhelm, and asked him, "Know'st thou the land?"—"It must mean Italy,"
said Wilhelm: "where didst thou get the little song?"—"Italy!" said Mignon, with an
earnest air. "If thou go to Italy, take me along with thee; for I am too cold here."—
"Hast thou been there already, little dear?" said Wilhelm. But the child was silent, and
nothing more could be got out of her.
Melina entered now: he looked at the cithern,—was glad that she had rigged it up
again so prettily. The instrument had been among Melina's stage-gear: Mignon had
begged it of him in the morning, and then gone to the old harper. On this occasion she
had shown a talent she was not before suspected of possessing.
Melina had already got possession of his wardrobe, with all that pertained to it: some
members of the town magistracy had promised him permission to act, for a time, in
the place. He was now returning with a merry heart and a cheerful look. His nature
seemed altogether changed: he was soft, courteous to every one,—nay, fond of
obliging, and almost attractive. He was happy, he said, at now being able to afford
employment to his friends, who had hitherto lain idle and embarrassed; sorry,
however, that at first he could not have it in his power to remunerate the excellent
actors whom fortune had offered him, in a style corresponding to their talents and
capacities; being under the necessity, before all other things, of discharging his debt to
so generous a friend as Wilhelm had proved himself to be.
"I cannot describe," said he to Wilhelm, "the friendliness which you have shown, in
helping me forward to the management of a theatre. When I found you here, I was in a
very curious predicament. You recollect how strongly I displayed to you, on our first
acquaintance, my aversion to the stage; and yet, on being married, I was forced to look
about for a place in some theatre, out of love to my wife, who promised to herself
much joy and great applause if so engaged. I could find none, at least no constant one;
but in return I luckily fell in with some commercial men, who, in extraordinary cases,
were enabled to employ a person that could handle his pen, that understood French,
and was not without a little skill in ciphering. I managed pretty well in this way for a
time; I was tolerably paid; got about me many things which I had need of, and did not
feel ashamed of my work. But these commissions of my patrons came to an end; they

could afford me no permanent establishment: and, ever since, my wife has continued
urging me still more to go upon the stage again; though, at present, alas! her own
situation is none of the favorablest for exhibiting herself with honor in the eyes of the
public. But now, I hope, the establishment which by your kind help I have the means of
setting up, will prove a good beginning for me and mine: you I shall thank for all my
future happiness, let matters turn out as they will."
Wilhelm listened to him with contentment: the whole fraternity of players were
likewise moderately satisfied with the declarations of the new manager; they secretly
rejoiced that an offer of employment had occurred so soon, and were disposed to put
up at first with a smaller salary, the rather, that most of them regarded the present
one, so unexpectedly placed within their reach, as a kind of supplement, on which a
short while ago they could not count. Melina made haste to profit by this favorable
temper: he endeavored in a sly way to get a little talk with each in private, and erelong
had, by various methods, so cockered them all, that they did not hesitate to strike a
bargain with him without loss of time; scarcely thinking of this new engagement, or
reckoning themselves secure at worst of getting free again after six-weeks' warning.
The terms were now to be reduced to proper form; and Melina was considering with
what pieces he would first entice the public, when a courier riding up informed
the Stallmeister that his lord and lady were at hand; on which the latter ordered out
his horses.
In a short time after this, the coach with its masses of luggage rolled in; two servants
sprang down from the coach-box before the inn; and Philina, according to her custom,
foremost in the way of novelties, placed herself within the door.
"Who are you?" said the countess, entering the house.
"An actress, at your Excellency's service," was the answer; while the cheat, with a most
innocent air, and looks of great humility, courtesied, and kissed the lady's gown.
The count, on seeing some other persons standing round, who also signified that they
were players, inquired about the strength of their company, their last place of
residence, their manager. "Had they but been Frenchmen," said he to his lady, "we
might have treated the prince with an unexpected enjoyment, and entertained him
with his favorite pastime at our house."

"And could we not," said the countess, "get these people, though unluckily they are
but Germans, to exhibit with us at the castle while the prince stays there? Without
doubt they have some degree of skill. A large party can never be so well amused with
any thing as with a theatre: besides, the baron would assist them."
So speaking, they went up-stairs; and Melina presented himself above, as manager.
"Call your folk together," said the count, "and place them before me, that I may see
what is in them. I must also have the list of pieces you profess to act."
Melina, with a low bow, hastened from the room, and soon returned with his actors.
They advanced in promiscuous succession: some, out of too great anxiety to please,
introduced themselves in a rather sorry style; the others, not much better, by
assuming an air of unconcern. Philina showed the deepest reverence to the countess,
who behaved with extreme graciousness and condescension: the count, in the mean
time, was mustering the rest. He questioned each about his special province of acting,
and signified to Melina that he must rigorously keep them to their several provinces,—
a precept which the manager received with the greatest devotion.
The count then stated to each in particular what he ought especially to study, what
about his figure or his postures ought to be amended; showed them luminously in
what points the Germans always fail; and displayed such extraordinary knowledge,
that all stood in the deepest humility, scarcely daring to draw their breath before so
enlightened a critic and so right honorable a patron.
"What fellow is that in the corner?" said the count, looking at a subject who had not
yet been presented to him, and who now approached,—a lean, shambling figure, with
a rusty coat, patched at the elbows, and a woful periwig covering his submissive head.
This person, whom, from the last Book, we know already as Philina's darling, had been
want to enact pedants, tutors, and poets,—generally undertaking parts in which any
cudgelling or ducking was to be endured. He had trained himself to certain crouching,
ludicrous, timid bows; and his faltering, stammering speech befitted the characters he
played, and created laughter in the audience; so that he was always looked on as a
useful member of the company, being moreover very serviceable and obliging. He
approached the count in his own peculiar way, bent himself before him, and answered
every question with the grimaces and gestures he was used to on the stage. The count
looked at him for some time with an air of attentive satisfaction and studious
observation; then, turning to the countess, "Child," said he, "consider this man well: I

will engage for it he is a great actor, or may become so." The creature here, in the
fulness of his heart, made an idiotic bow: the count burst into laughing, and exclaimed,
"He does it excellently well! I bet this fellow can act any thing he likes: it is pity that he
has not been already used to something better."
So singular a prepossession was extremely galling to the rest: Melina alone felt no
vexation, but completely coincided with the count, and answered, with a prostrate
look, "Alas! it is too true: both he and others of us have long stood in need of such
encouragement, and such a judge, as we now find in your Excellency."
"Is this the whole company?" inquired the count.
"Some of them are absent," said the crafty Melina; "and at any rate, if we should meet
with support, we could soon collect abundant numbers from the neighborhood."
Philina in the mean while was saying to the countess, "There is a very pretty young
man above, who without doubt would shortly become a first-rate amateur."
"Why does he not appear?" said the countess.
"I will bring him," cried Philina, hastening to the door.
She found our friend still occupied with Mignon: she persuaded him to come down. He
followed her with some reluctance: yet curiosity impelled him; for, hearing that the
family were people of rank, he longed much to know more of them. On entering the
room, his eyes met those of the countess, which were directed towards him. Philina
led him to the lady, while the count was busied with the rest. Wilhelm made his bow,
and replied to several questions from the fair dame, not without confusion of mind.
Her beauty and youth, her graceful dignity and refined manner, made the most
delightful impression on him; and the more so, as her words and looks were
accompanied with a certain bashfulness, one might almost say embarrassment. He
was likewise introduced to the count, who, however, took no special notice of him, but
went to the window with his lady, and seemed to ask her about something. It was easy
to observe that her opinion accorded strongly with his own; that she even tried to
persuade him, and strengthen him in his intentions.
In a short while he turned round to the company, and said, "I must not stay at present,
but I will send a friend to you; and if you make reasonable proposals, and will take very
great pains, I am not disinclined to let you play at the castle."

All testified their joy at this: Philina in particular kissed the hands of the countess with
the greatest vivacity.
"Look you, little thing," said the lady, patting the cheeks of the light-minded girl, "look
you, child, you shall come to me again: I will keep my promise; only you must dress
better." Philina stated in excuse that she had little to lay out upon her wardrobe; and
the countess immediately ordered her waiting-maids to bring from the carriage a silk
neckerchief and an English hat, the articles easiest to come at, and give them to her
new favorite. The countess herself then decked Philina, who continued very neatly to
support, by her looks and conduct, that saintlike, guiltless character she had assumed
at first.
The count took his lady's hand, and led her down. She bowed to the whole company
with a friendly air, in passing by them: she turned round again towards Wilhelm, and
said to him, with the most gracious mien, "We shall soon meet again."
These happy prospects enlivened the whole party: every one of them gave free course
to his hopes, his wishes, his imaginations; spoke of the parts he would play, and the
applause he would acquire. Melina was considering how he might still, by a few speedy
exhibitions, gain a little money from the people of the town before he left it; while
others went into the kitchen, to order a better dinner than of late they had been used
to.

CHAPTER II.
After a few days the baron came, and it was not without fear that Melina received him.
The count had spoken of him as a critic: and it might be dreaded, he would speedily
detect the weakness of the little party, and see that it formed no efficient troop; there
being scarcely a play which they could act in a suitable manner. But the manager, as
well as all the members, were soon delivered from their cares, on finding that the
baron was a man who viewed the German stage with a most patriotic enthusiasm, to
whom every player, and every company of players, was welcome and agreeable. He
saluted them all with great solemnity; was happy to come upon a German theatre so
unexpectedly, to get connected with it, and to introduce their native Muses to the
mansion of his relative. He then pulled out from his pocket a bundle of stitched papers,
in which Melina hoped to find the terms of their contract specified; but it proved
something very different. It was a drama, which the baron himself had composed, and
wished to have played by them: he requested their attention while he read it. Willingly
they formed a circle round him, charmed at being able with so little trouble to secure
the favor of a man so important; though, judging by the thickness of the manuscript, it
was clear that a very long rehearsal might be dreaded. Their apprehensions were not
groundless: the piece was written in five acts, and that sort of acts which never have
an end.
The hero was an excellent, virtuous, magnanimous, and at the same time
misunderstood and persecuted, man: this worthy person, after many trials, gained the
victory at last over all his enemies; on whom, in consequence, the most rigorous poetic
justice would have been exercised, had he not pardoned them on the spot.
While this piece was rehearsing, each of the auditors had leisure enough to think of
himself, and to mount up quite softly from the humble prostration of mind, to which, a
little while ago, he had felt disposed, into a comfortable state of contentment with his
own gifts and advantages, and, from this elevation, to discover the most pleasing
prospects in the future. Such of them as found in the play no parts adapted for their
own acting, internally pronounced it bad, and viewed the baron as a miserable author;
while the others, every time they noticed any passage which they hoped might procure
them a little clapping of the hands, exalted it with the greatest praise, to the
immeasurable satisfaction of the author.
The commercial part of their affair was soon completed. Melina made an
advantageous bargain with the baron, and contrived to keep it secret from the rest.

Of our friend, Melina took occasion to declare in passing, that he seemed to be
successfully qualifying himself for becoming a dramatic poet, and even to have some
capacities for being an actor. The baron introduced himself to Wilhelm as a colleague;
and the latter by and by produced some short pieces, which, with a few other relics,
had escaped by chance, on the day when he threw the greater part of his works into
the flames. The baron lauded both his pieces and delivery: he spoke of it as a settled
thing, that Wilhelm should come over to the castle with the rest. For all, at his
departure, he engaged to find the best reception, comfortable quarters, a good table,
applauses, and presents; and Melina further gave the promise of a certain modicum of
pocket-money to each.
It is easy to conceive how this visit raised the spirits of the party: instead of a low and
harassing situation, they now at once saw honors and enjoyment before them. On the
score of these great hopes they already made merry, and each thought it needless and
stingy to retain a single groschen of money in his purse.
Meanwhile our friend was taking counsel with himself about accompanying the troop
to the castle; and he found it, in more than one sense, advisable to do so. Melina was
in hopes of paying off his debt, at least in part, by this engagement; and Wilhelm, who
had come from home to study men, was unwilling to let slip this opportunity of
examining the great world, where he expected to obtain much insight into life, into
himself, and the dramatic art. With all this, he durst not confess how greatly he wished
again to be near the beautiful countess. He rather sought to persuade himself in
general of the mighty advantages which a more intimate acquaintance with the world
of rank and wealth would procure for him. He pursued his reflections on the count, the
countess, the baron; on the security, the grace, and propriety of their demeanor: he
exclaimed with rapture when alone,—
"Thrice happy are they to be esteemed, whom their birth of itself exalts above the
lower stages of mankind; who do not need to traverse those perplexities, not even to
skirt them, in which many worthy men so painfully consume the whole period of life.
Far-extending and unerring must their vision be, on that higher station; easy each step
of their progress in the world. From their very birth, they are placed, as it were, in a
ship, which, in this voyage we have all to make, enables them to profit by the favorable
winds, and to ride out the cross ones; while others, bare of help, must wear their
strength away in swimming, can derive little profit from the favorable breeze, and in
the storm must soon become exhausted, and sink to the bottom. What convenience,

what ease of movement, does a fortune we are born to confer upon us! How securely
does a traffic flourish, which is founded on a solid capital, where the failure of one or
of many enterprises does not of necessity reduce us to inaction! Who can better know
the worth and worthlessness of earthly things, than he that has had within his choice
the enjoyment of them from youth upwards? and who can earlier guide his mind to
the useful, the necessary, the true, than he that may convince himself of so many
errors in an age when his strength is yet fresh to begin a new career?"
Thus did our friend cry joy to all inhabitants of the upper regions, and, not to them
only, but to all that were permitted to approach their circle, and draw water from their
wells. So he thanked his own happy stars, that seemed preparing to grant this mighty
blessing to himself.
Melina, in the mean time, was torturing his brains to get the company arranged
according to their several provinces, and each of them appointed to produce his own
peculiar effect. In compliance with the count's injunctions and his own persuasions, he
made many efforts; but at last, when it came to the point of execution, he was forced
to be content, if, in so small a troop, he found his people willing to adjust themselves
to this or that part as they best were able. When matters would admit of it, Laertes
played the lover; Philina the lady's maid; the two young girls took up between them
the characters of the artless and tender loved ones; the boisterous old gentleman of
the piece was sure to be the best acted. Melina himself thought he might come forth
as chevalier; Madam Melina, to her no small sorrow, was obliged to satisfy herself with
personating young wives, or even affectionate mothers; and as in the newer plays, a
poet or pedant is rarely introduced, and still more rarely for the purpose of being
laughed at, the well-known favorite of the count was now usually transformed into
president or minister,—these being commonly set forth as knaves, and severely
handled in the fifth act. Melina, too, in the part of chamberlain or the like, introduced,
with great satisfaction, the ineptitudes put into his hands by various honest Germans,
according to use and wont, in many well-accepted plays: he delighted in these
characters, because he had an opportunity of decking himself out in a fashionable
style, and was called upon to assume the airs of a courtier, which he conceived himself
to possess in great perfection.
It was not long till they were joined by several actors from different quarters; who,
being received without very strict examination, were also retained without very
burdensome conditions.

Wilhelm had been more than once assailed with persuasions from Melina to undertake
an amateur part. This he declined; yet he interested and occupied himself about the
general cause with great alacrity, without our new manager's acknowledging his labors
in the smallest. On the contrary, it seemed to be Melina's opinion, that with his office
he had at the same time picked up all the necessary skill for carrying it on. In particular,
the task of curtailment formed one of his most pleasing occupations: he would
succeed in reducing any given piece down to the regular measure of time, without the
slightest respect to proprieties or proportions, or any thing whatever, but his watch.
He met with great encouragement; the public was very much delighted; the most
knowing inhabitants of the burgh maintained, that the prince's theatre itself was not
so well conducted as theirs.

CHAPTER III.
At last the time arrived when the company had to prepare for travelling, and to expect
the coaches and other vehicles that were to carry them to the count's mansion. Much
altercation now took place about the mode of travelling, and who should sit with
whom. The ordering and distribution of the whole was at length settled and
concluded, with great labor, and, alas! without effect. At the appointed hour, fewer
coaches came than were expected: they had to accommodate themselves as the case
would admit. The baron, who followed shortly afterwards on horseback, assigned, as
the reason, that all was in motion at the castle, not only because the prince was to
arrive a few days earlier than had been looked for, but also because an unexpected
party of visitors were already come: the place, he said, was in great confusion; on this
account perhaps they would not lodge so comfortably as had been intended,—a
change which grieved him very much.
Our travellers packed themselves into the carriages the best way they could; and the
weather being tolerable, and the castle but a few leagues distant, the heartiest of the
troop preferred setting out on foot to waiting the return of the coaches. The caravan
got under way with great jubilee, for the first time without caring how the landlord's
bill was to be paid. The count's mansion rose on their souls like a palace of the fairies:
they were the happiest and merriest mortals in the world. Each throughout the
journey, in his own peculiar mode, kept fastening a continued chain of fortune, honor,
and prosperity to that auspicious day.
A heavy rain, which fell unexpectedly, did not banish these delightful contemplations;
though, as it incessantly continued with more and more violence, many of the party
began to show traces of uneasiness. The night came on; and no sight could be more
welcome than the palace of the count, which shone upon them from a hill at some
distance, glancing with light in all its stories, so that they could reckon every window.
On approaching nearer, they found all the windows in the wings illuminated also. Each
of the party thought within himself what chamber would be his; and most of them
prudently determined to be satisfied with a room in the attic, or some of the side
buildings.
They were now proceeding through the village, past the inn. Wilhelm stopped the
coach, in the mind to alight there; but the landlord protested that it was not in his
power to afford the least accommodation: his lordship the count, he said, being visited

by some unexpected guests, had immediately engaged the whole inn; every chamber
in the house had been marked with chalk last night, specifying who was to lodge there.
Our friend was accordingly obliged, against his will, to travel forward to the castle with
the rest of the company.
In one of the side buildings, round the kitchen fire, they noticed several cooks running
busily about,—a sight which refreshed them not a little. Servants came jumping hastily
with lights to the staircase of the main door, and the hearts of the worthy pilgrims
overflowed at the aspect of such honors. But how great was their surprise, when this
cordial reception changed into a storm of curses. The servants scouted the coachman
for driving in hither; they must wheel out again, it was bawled, and take their loading
round to the old castle; there was no room here for such guests! To this unfriendly and
unexpected dismissal, they joined all manner of jeering, and laughed aloud at each
other for leaping out in the rain on so false an errand. It was still pouring; no star was
visible in the sky; while our company were dragged along a rough, jolting road,
between two walls, into the old mansion, which stood behind, inhabited by none since
the present count's father had built the new residence in front of it. The carriages drew
up, partly in the court-yard, partly in a long, arched gateway; and the postilions, people
hired from the village, unyoked their horses, and rode off.
As nobody came forward to receive the travellers, they alighted from their places, they
shouted, and searched. In vain! All continued dark and still. The wind swept through
the lofty gate: the court and the old towers were lying gray and dreary, and so dim that
their forms could scarcely be distinguished in the gloom. The people were all
shuddering and freezing; the women were becoming frightened; the children began to
cry; the general impatience was increasing every minute; so quick a revolution of
fortune, for which no one of them had been at all prepared, entirely destroyed their
equanimity.
Expecting every minute that some person would appear and unbolt the doors,
mistaking at one time the pattering of rain, at another the rocking of the wind, for the
much-desired footstep of the castle bailiff, they continued downcast and inactive: it
occurred to none of them to go into the new mansion, and there solicit help from
charitable souls. They could not understand where their friend the baron was
lingering: they were in the most disconsolate condition.
At last some people actually arrived: by their voices, they were recognized as the
pedestrians who had fallen behind the others on the journey. They intimated that the

baron had tumbled with his horse, and hurt his leg severely: and that, on calling at the
castle, they, too, had been roughly directed hither.
The whole company were in extreme perplexity: they guessed and speculated as to
what should now be done, but they could fix on nothing. At length they noticed from
afar a lantern advancing, and took fresh breath at sight of it; but their hopes of quick
deliverance again evaporated, when the object approached, and came to be distinctly
seen. A groom was lighting the well-known Stallmeister of the castle towards them:
this gentleman, on coming nearer, very anxiously inquired for Mademoiselle Philina.
No sooner had she stepped forth from the crowd, than he very pressingly offered to
conduct her to the new mansion, where a little place had been provided for her with
the countess's maids. She did not hesitate long about accepting his proposal; she
caught his arm, and, recommending her trunk to the care of the rest, was going to
hasten off with him directly: but the others intercepted them, asking, entreating,
conjuring theStallmeister; till at last, to get away with his fair one, he promised every
thing, assuring them, that, in a little while, the castle should be opened, and they
lodged in the most comfortable manner. In a few moments they saw the glimmer of
his lantern vanish: they long looked in vain for another gleam of light. At last, after
much watching, scolding, and reviling, it actually appeared, and revived them with a
touch of hope and consolation.
An ancient footman opened the door of the old edifice, into which they rushed with
violence. Each of them now strove to have his trunk unfastened, and brought in beside
him. Most of this luggage, like the persons of its owners, was thoroughly wetted.
Having but a single light, the process of unpacking went on very slowly. In the dark
passages they pushed against each other, they stumbled, they fell. They begged to
have more lights, they begged to have some fuel. The monosyllabic footman, with
much ado, consented to put down his own lantern; then went hisway, and came not
again.
They now began to investigate the edifice. The doors of all the rooms were open: large
stoves, tapestry hangings, inlaid floors, yet bore witness to its former pomp; but of
other house-gear there was none to be seen,—no table, chair, or mirror, nothing but a
few monstrous, empty bedsteads, stripped of every ornament and every necessary.
The wet trunks and knapsacks were adopted as seats: a part of the tired wanderers
placed themselves upon the floor. Wilhelm had sat down upon some steps: Mignon lay
upon his knees. The child was restless; and, when he asked what ailed her, she

answered, "I am hungry." He himself had nothing that could still the craving of the
child: the rest of the party had consumed their whole provision, so he was obliged to
leave the little traveller without refreshment. Through the whole adventure he had
been inactive, silently immersed in thought. He was very sullen, and full of indignant
regret that he had not kept by his first determination, and remained at the inn, though
he should have slept in the garret.
The rest demeaned themselves in various ways. Some of them had got a heap of old
wood collected within a vast, gaping chimney in the hall: they set fire to the pile with
great huzzaing. Unhappily, however, their hopes of warming and drying themselves by
means of it were mocked in the most frightful manner. The chimney, it appeared, was
there for ornament alone, and was walled up above; so the smoke rushed quickly back,
and at once filled the whole chamber. The dry wood rose crackling into flames; the
flame was also driven back; the draught sweeping through the broken windows gave it
a wavering direction. Terrified lest the castle should catch fire, the unhappy guests had
to tear the burning sticks asunder, to smother and trample them under their feet; the
smoke increased; their case was rendered more intolerable than before; they were
driven to the brink of desperation.
Wilhelm had retreated from the smoke into a distant chamber, to which Mignon soon
followed him, leading in a well-dressed servant, with a high, clear, double-lighted
lantern in his hand. He turned to Wilhelm, and, holding out to him some fruits and
confectionery on a beautiful porcelain plate, "The young lady up-stairs," said he,
"sends you this, with the request that you would join her party: she bids me tell you,"
added the lackey, with a sort of grin, "that she is very well off yonder, and wishes to
divide her enjoyments with her friends."
Wilhelm had not at all expected such a message; for, ever since the adventure on the
stone bench, he had treated Philina with the most decided contempt. He was still so
resolute to have no more concern with her that he thought of sending back her dainty
gifts untasted, when a supplicating look of Mignon's induced him to accept them. He
returned his thanks in the name of the child. The invitation he entirely rejected. He
desired the servant to exert himself a little for the stranger company, and made
inquiry for the baron. The latter, he was told, had gone to bed, but had already, as the
lackey understood, given orders to some other person to take charge of these
unfortunate and ill-lodged gentlemen.

The servant went away, leaving one of his lights, which Wilhelm, in the absence of a
candlestick, contrived to fix upon the window-casement; and now, at least in his
meditations, he could see the four walls of his chamber. Nor was it long till
preparations were commenced for conducting our travellers to rest. Candles arrived by
degrees, though without snuffers; then a few chairs; an hour afterwards came bedclothes; then pillows, all well steeped in rain. It was far past midnight when straw beds
and mattresses were produced, which, if sent at first, would have been extremely
welcome.
In the interim, also, somewhat to eat and drink had been brought in: it was enjoyed
without much criticism; though it looked like a most disorderly collection of remains,
and offered no very singular proof of the esteem in which our guests were held.

CHAPTER IV.
The disorders and mischievous tricks of some frolicsome companions still further
augmented the disquietudes and distresses of the night: these gay people woke each
other; each played a thousand giddy pranks to plague his fellow. The next morning
dawned amid loud complaints against their friend the baron, for having so deceived
them, for having given so very false a notion of the order and comfort that awaited
their arrival. However, to their great surprise and consolation, at an early hour the
count himself, attended by a few servants, made his entrance, and inquired about
their circumstances. He appeared much vexed on discovering how badly they had
fared; and the baron, who came limping along, supported on the arm of a servant,
bitterly accused the steward for neglecting his commands on this occasion,—showing
great anxiety to have that person punished for his disobedience.
The count gave immediate orders that every thing should be arranged, in his presence,
to the utmost possible convenience of the guests. While this was going on, some
officers arrived, who forthwith scraped acquaintance with the actresses. The count
assembled all the company before him, spoke to each by name, introduced a few jokes
among his observations; so that every one was charmed at the gracious condescension
of his lordship. At last it came to Wilhelm's turn. He appeared with Mignon holding by
his hand. Our friend excused himself, in the best terms he could, for the freedom he
had taken. The count, on the other hand, spoke as if the visit had been looked for.
A gentleman, who stood beside the count, and who, although he wore no uniform,
appeared to be an officer, conversed with Wilhelm: he was evidently not a common
man. His large, keen blue eyes, looking out from beneath a high brow; his light-colored
hair, thrown carelessly back; his middle stature; every thing about him,—showed an
active, firm, and decisive mode of being. His questions were lively. He seemed to be at
home in all that he inquired about.
Wilhelm asked the baron what this person was, but found that he had little good to say
of him. "He held the rank of major, was the special favorite of the prince; managed his
most secret affairs; was, in short, regarded as his right arm,—nay, there was reason to
believe him the prince's natural son. He had been on embassies in France, England,
Italy. In all those places he had greatly distinguished himself, by which means he was
grown conceited; imagining, among other pretensions, that he thoroughly understood
the literature of Germany, and allowing himself to vent all kinds of sorry jests upon it.
He, the baron, was in the habit of avoiding all intercourse with him; and Wilhelm

would do well to imitate that conduct, for it somehow happened that no one could be
near him without being punished for it. He was called Jarno, though nobody knew
rightly what to make of such a name."
Wilhelm had nothing to urge against all this: he had felt a sort of inclination for the
stranger, though he noticed in him something cold and repulsive.
The company being arranged and distributed throughout the castle, Melina issued the
strictest orders that they should behave themselves with decency, the women live in a
separate quarter, and each direct his whole attention to the study of dramatic art, and
of the characters he had to play. He posted up written ordinances, consisting of many
articles, upon all the doors. He settled the amount of fine which should be levied upon
each transgressor, and put into a common box.
This edict was but little heeded. Young officers went out and in; they jested, not in the
most modest fashion, with the actresses; made game of the actors, and annihilated
the whole system of police before it had the smallest time to take root in the
community. The people ran chasing one another through the rooms; they changed
clothes; they disguised themselves. Melina, attempting to be rigorous with a few at
first, was exasperated by every sort of insolence; and, when the count soon after sent
for him to come and view the place where his theatre was to be erected, matters grew
worse and worse. The young gentry devised a thousand broad jokes: by the help of
some actors, they became yet coarser. It seemed as if the old castle had been
altogether given up to an infuriate host, and the racket did not end till dinner.
Meanwhile, the count had led Melina over to a large hall, which, though belonging to
the old castle, communicated by a gallery with the new one: it seemed very well
adapted for being changed into a little theatre. Here the sagacious lord of the mansion
pointed out in person how he wanted every thing to be.
The labor now commenced in the greatest haste; the stage apparatus was erected and
furbished up; what decorations they had brought along with them and could employ
were set in order, and what was wanting was prepared by some skilful workmen of the
count's. Wilhelm likewise put his hand to the business; he assisted in settling the
perspective, in laying off the outlines of the scenery: he was very anxious that nothing
should be executed clumsily. The count, who frequently came in to inspect their
progress, was highly satisfied: he showed particularly how they should proceed in

every case, displaying an uncommon knowledge of all the arts they were concerned
with.
Next began the business of rehearsing, in good earnest; and there would have been
enough of space and leisure for this undertaking, had the actors not continually been
interrupted by the presence of visitors. Some new guests were daily arriving, and each
insisted on viewing the operations of the company.

CHAPTER V.
The baron had, for several days, been cheering Wilhelm with the hope of being
formally presented to the countess. "I have told this excellent lady," said he, "so much
about the talent and fine sentiment displayed in your compositions, that she feels
quite impatient to see you, and hear one or two of them read. Be prepared, therefore,
to come over at a moment's notice; for, the first morning she is at leisure, you will
certainly be called on." He then pointed out to him the afterpiece it would be proper
to produce on that occasion; adding, that doubtless it would recommend him to no
usual degree of favor. The lady, he declared, was extremely sorry that a guest like him
had happened to arrive at a time of such confusion, when they could not entertain him
in a style more suitable to his merits and their own wishes.
In consequence of this information, Wilhelm, with the most sedulous attention, set
about preparing the piece, which was to usher him into the great world. "Hitherto,"
said he, "thou hast labored in silence for thyself, applauded only by a small circle of
friends. Thou hast for a time despaired of thy abilities, and are yet full of anxious
doubts whether even thy present path is the right one, and whether thy talent for the
stage at all corresponds with thy inclination for it. In the hearing of such practised
judges, in the closet where no illusion can take place, the attempt is far more
hazardous than elsewhere; and yet I would not willingly recoil from the experiment: I
could wish to add this pleasure to my former enjoyments, and, if it might be, to give
extension and stability to my hopes from the future."
He accordingly went through some pieces; read them with the keenest critical eye;
made corrections here and there; recited them aloud, that he might be perfect in his
tones and expression: and finally selected the work which he was best acquainted
with, and hoped to gain most honor by. He put it in his pocket, one morning, on being
summoned to attend the countess.
The baron had assured him that there would be no one present but the lady herself
and a worthy female friend of hers. On entering the chamber, the Baroness von C——
advanced with great friendliness to meet him, expressed her happiness at gaining his
acquaintance, and introduced him to the countess, who was then under the hands of
her hair-dresser. The countess received him with kind words and looks. But it vexed
him to see Philina kneeling at her chair, and playing a thousand fooleries. "The poor
child," said the baroness, "has just been singing to us. Finish the song you were in the
midst of: we should not like to lose it."

Wilhelm listened to her quavering with great patience, being anxious for
the friseur's departure before he should begin to read. They offered him a cup of
chocolate, the baroness herself handing him the biscuit. Yet, in spite of these civilities,
he relished not his breakfast: he was longing too eagerly to lay before the lovely
countess some performance that might interest and gratify her. Philina, too, stood
somewhat in his way: on former occasions, while listening to him, she had more than
once been troublesome. He looked at the friseur with a painful feeling, hoping every
moment that the tower of curls would be complete.
Meanwhile the count came in, and began to talk of the fresh visitors he was expecting,
of the day's occupations or amusements, and of various domestic matters that were
started. On his retiring, some officers sent to ask permission of the countess to pay
their respects to her, as they had to leave the castle before dinner. The footman
having come to his post at the door, she permitted him to usher in the gentlemen.
The baroness, amid these interruptions, took pains to entertain our friend, and
showed him much consideration; all which he accepted with becoming reverence,
though not without a little absence of mind. He often felt for the manuscript in his
pocket, and hoped for his deliverance every instant. He was almost losing patience,
when a man-milliner was introduced, and immediately began without mercy to open
his papers, bags, and bandboxes; pressing all his various wares upon the ladies, with an
importunity peculiar to that species of creature.
The company increased. The baroness cast a look at Wilhelm, and then whispered with
the countess: he noticed this, but did not understand the purpose of it. The whole,
however, became clear enough, when, after an hour of painful and fruitless
endurance, he went away. He then found a beautiful pocket-book, of English
manufacture, in his pocket. The baroness had dexterously put it there without his
notice; and soon afterwards the countess's little black came out, and handed him an
elegantly flowered waistcoat, without very clearly saying whence it came.

CHAPTER VI.
This mingled feeling of vexation and gratitude spoiled the remainder of his day; till,
towards evening, he once more found employment. Melina informed him that the
count had been speaking of a little prelude, which he wished to have produced in
honor of the prince, on the day of his Highness's arrival. He meant to have the great
qualities of this noble hero and philanthropist personified in the piece. These Virtues
were to advance together, to recite his praises, and finally to encircle his bust with
garlands of flowers and laurels; behind which a transparency might be inserted,
representing the princely Hat, and his name illuminated on it. The count, Melina said,
had ordered him to take charge of getting ready the verses and other arrangements;
and Wilhelm, he hoped, to whom it must be an easy matter, would stand by him on
this occasion.
"What!" exclaimed our friend, in a splenetic tone, "have we nothing but portraits,
illuminated names, and allegorical figures, to show in honor of a prince, who, in my
opinion, merits quite a different eulogy? How can it flatter any reasonable man to see
himself set up in effigy, and his name glimmering on oiled paper? I am very much
afraid that your allegories, particularly in the present state of the wardrobe, will
furnish occasion for many ambiguities and jestings. If you mean, however, to compose
the play, or have it composed, I can have nothing to object; only I desire to have no
part or lot in the matter."
Melina excused himself; alleging this to be only a casual hint of his lordship the count,
who for the rest had left the arrangement of the piece entirely in their own hands.
"With all my heart," replied our friend, "will I contribute something to the pleasure of
this noble family: my Muse has never had so pleasant an employment as to sing,
though in broken numbers, the praises of a prince who merits so much veneration. I
will think of the matter: perhaps I may be able to contrive some way of bringing out
our little troop, so as at least to produce some effect."
From this moment Wilhelm eagerly reflected on his undertaking. Before going to sleep
he had got it all reduced to some degree of order; early next morning his plan was
ready, the scenes laid out; a few of the most striking passages and songs were even
versified and written down.
As soon as he was dressed, our friend made haste to wait upon the baron, to submit
the plan to his inspection, and take his advice upon certain points connected with it.

The baron testified his approbation of it, but not without considerable surprise. For, on
the previous evening, he had heard his lordship talk of having ordered some quite
different piece to be prepared and versified.
"To me it seems improbable," replied our friend, "that it could be his lordship's wish to
have the piece got ready, exactly as he gave it to Melina. If I am not mistaken, he
intended merely to point out to us from a distance the path we were to follow. The
amateur and critic shows the artist what is wanted, and then leaves to him the care of
producing it by his own means."
"Not at all," replied the baron: "his lordship understands that the piece shall be
composed according to that and no other plan which he has himself prescribed. Yours
has, indeed, a remote similarity with his idea; but if we mean to accomplish our
purpose, and get the count diverted from his first thought, we shall need to employ
the ladies in the matter. The baroness especially contrives to execute such operations
in the most masterly manner: the question is now, whether your plan shall so please
her, that she will undertake the business; in that case it will certainly succeed."
"We need the assistance of the ladies," said our friend, "at any rate; for neither our
company nor our wardrobe would suffice without them. I have counted on some
pretty children, that are running up and down the house, and belong to certain of the
servants."
He then desired the baron to communicate his plan to the ladies. The baron soon
returned with intelligence that they wished to speak with Wilhelm personally. That
same evening, when the gentlemen sat down to play, which, owing to the arrival of a
certain general, was expected to be deeper and keener than usual, the countess and
her friend, under pretext of some indisposition, would retire to their chamber, where
Wilhelm, being introduced by a secret staircase, might submit his project without
interruption. This sort of mystery, the baron said, would give the adventure a peculiar
charm; in particular the baroness was rejoicing like a child in the prospect of their
rendezvous, and the more so, because it was to be accomplished secretly, and against
the inclination of the count.
Towards evening, at the appointed time, Wilhelm was sent for, and led in with caution.
As the baroness advanced to meet him in a small cabinet, the manner of their
interview brought former happy scenes for a moment to his mind. She conducted him
along to the countess's chamber, and they now proceeded earnestly to question and

investigate. He exhibited his plan with the utmost warmth and vivacity, so that his fair
audience were quite decided in its favor. Our readers also will permit us to present a
brief sketch of it here.
The play was to open with a dance of children in some rural scene,—their dance
representing that particular game wherein each has to wheel round, and gain the
other's place. This was to be followed by several variations of their play; till at last, in
performing a dance of the repeating kind, they were all to sing a merry song.
Here the old harper with Mignon was to enter, and, by the curiosity which they
excited, gather several country-people round them; the harper would sing various
songs in praise of peace, repose, and joy; and Mignon would then dance the eggdance.
In these innocent delights, they are disturbed by the sound of martial music; and the
party are surprised by a troop of soldiers. The men stand on the defensive, and are
overcome: the girls flee, and are overtaken. In the tumult all seems going to
destruction, when a person (about whose form and qualities the poet was not yet
determined) enters, and, by signifying that the general is near, restores composure.
Whereupon the hero's character is painted in the finest colors; security is promised in
the midst of arms; violence and lawless disorder are now to berestrained. A universal
festival is held in honor of the noble-minded captain.
The countess and her friend expressed great satisfaction with the plan; only they
maintained that there must of necessity be something of allegory introduced, to make
it palatable to his lordship. The baron proposed that the leader of the soldiers should
be represented as the Genius of Dissension and Violence; that Minerva should then
advance to bind fetters on him, to give notice of the hero's approach, and celebrate his
praise. The baroness undertook the task of persuading the count that this plan was the
one proposed by himself, with a few alterations; at the same time expressly
stipulating, that without fail, at the conclusion of the piece, the bust, the illuminated
name, and the princely Hat should be exhibited in due order; since otherwise, her
attempt was vain.
Wilhelm had already figured in his mind how delicately and how nobly he would have
the praises of his hero celebrated in the mouth of Minerva, and it was not without a
long struggle that he yielded in this point. Yet he felt himself delightfully constrained to
yield. The beautiful eyes of the countess, and her lovely demeanor, would easily have

moved him to sin against his conscience as a poet; to abandon the finest and most
interesting invention, the keenly wished-for unity of his composition, and all its most
suitable details. His conscience as a burgher had a trial no less hard to undergo, when
the ladies, in distributing the characters, pointedly insisted that he must undertake one
himself.
Laertes had received for his allotment the part of that violent war-god; Wilhelm was to
represent the leader of the peasants, who had some very pretty and tender verses to
recite. After long resistance he was forced to comply: he could find no excuse, when
the baroness protested that their stage was in all respects to be regarded as a private
one, and that she herself would very gladly play on it, if they could find her a fit
occasion. On receiving his consent, they parted with our friend on the kindest terms.
The baroness assured him that he was an incomparable man: she accompanied him to
the little stairs, and wished him good-night with a squeeze of the hand.

CHAPTER VII.
The interest in his undertakings, which the countess and her friend expressed and felt
so warmly, quickened Wilhelm's faculties and zeal: the plan of his piece, which the
process of describing it had rendered more distinct, was now present in the most
brilliant vividness before his mind. He spent the greater part of that night, and the
whole of next morning, in the sedulous versification of the dialogue and songs.
He had proceeded a considerable way, when a message came, requiring his
attendance in the castle: the noble company, who were then at breakfast, wished to
speak with him. As he entered the parlor, the baroness advanced to meet him, and,
under pretext of wishing him good-morning, whispered cunningly, "Say nothing of your
piece but what you shall be asked."
"I hear," cried the count to him, "that you are very busy working at my prelude, which I
mean to present in honor of the prince. I consent that you introduce a Minerva into it;
and we are just thinking beforehand how the goddess shall be dressed, that we may
not blunder in costume. For this purpose I am causing them to fetch from the library all
the books that contain any figures of her."
At the same instant, one or two servants entered the parlor, with a huge basket full of
books of every shape and appearance.
Montfaucon, the collections of antique statues, gems, and coins, all sorts of
mythological writings, were turned up, and their plates compared. But this was not
enough. The count's faithful memory recalled to him all the Minervas to be found in
frontispieces, vignettes, or anywhere else; and book after book was, in consequence,
carried from the library, till finally the count was sitting in a chaos of volumes. Unable
at last to recollect any other figure of Minerva, he observed with a smile, "I durst bet,
that now there is not a single Minerva in all the library; and perhaps it is the first time
that a collection of books has been so totally deprived of the presence of its patron
goddess."
The whole company were merry at this thought: Jarno particularly, who had all along
been spurring on the count to call for more and more books, laughed quite
immoderately.

"Now," said the count, turning to Wilhelm, "one chief point is,—which goddess do you
mean? Minerva, or Pallas? The goddess of war, or of the arts?"
"Would it not be best, your Excellency," said Wilhelm, "if we were not clearly to
express ourselves on this head; if, since the goddess plays a double part in the ancient
mythology, we also exhibited her here in a double quality? She announces a warrior,
but only to calm the tumults of the people; she celebrates a hero by exalting his
humanity; she conquers violence, and restores peace and security."
The baroness, afraid lest Wilhelm might betray himself, hastily pushed forward the
countess's tailor, to give his opinion how such an antique robe could best be got ready.
This man, being frequently employed in making masquerade dresses, very easily
contrived the business: and as Madam Melina, notwithstanding her advanced state of
pregnancy, had undertaken to enact the celestial virgin, the tailor was directed to take
her measure; and the countess, though with some reluctance, selected from the
wardrobe the clothes he was to cut up for that purpose.
The baroness, in her dexterous way, again contrived to lead Wilhelm aside, and let him
know that she had been providing all the other necessaries. Shortly afterwards she
sent him the musician, who had charge of the count's private band; and this professor
set about composing what airs were wanted, or choosing from his actual stock such
tunes as appeared suitable. From this time all went on according to the wishes of our
friend: the count made no more inquiries about the piece; being altogether occupied
with the transparent decoration, destined to surprise the spectators at the conclusion
of the play. His inventive genius, aided by the skill of his confectioner, produced, in
fact, a very pretty article. In the course of his travels, the count had witnessed the
most splendid exhibitions of this sort: he had also brought home with him a number of
copper-plates and drawings, and could sketch such things with considerable taste.
Meanwhile Wilhelm finished the play, gave every one his part, and began the study of
his own. The musician also, having great skill in dancing, prepared the ballet; so that
every thing proceeded as it ought.
Yet one unexpected obstacle occurred, which threatened to occasion an unpleasant
gap in the performance. He had promised to himself a striking effect from Mignon's
egg-dance, and was much surprised when the child, with her customary dryness of
manner, refused to dance; saying she was now his, and would no more go upon the
stage. He sought to move her by every sort of persuasion, and did not discontinue his

attempt till she began weeping bitterly, fell at his feet, and cried out, "Dearest father!
stay thou from the boards thyself!" Little heeding this caution, he studied how to give
the scene some other turn that might be equally interesting.
Philina, whose appointment was to act one of the peasant girls, and in the concluding
dance to give the single-voice part of the song, and lead the chorus, felt exceedingly
delighted that it had been so ordered. In other respects, too, her present life was
altogether to her mind: she had her separate chamber; was constantly beside the
countess, entertaining her with fooleries, and daily received some present for her
pains. Among other things, a dress had been expressly made for her wearing in this
prelude. And being of a light, imitative nature, she quickly marked in the procedure of
the ladies whatever would befit herself: she had of late grown all politeness and
decorum. The attentions of the Stallmeister augmented rather than diminished; and as
the officers also paid zealous court to her, living in so genial an element, it came into
her head for once in her life to play the prude, and, in a quiet, gradual way, to take
upon herself a certain dignity of manner to which she had not before aspired. Cool and
sharp-sighted as she was, eight days had not elapsed till she knew the weak side of
every person in the house; so that, had she possessed the power of acting from any
constant motive, she might very easily have made her fortune. But on this occasion, as
on all others, she employed her advantages merely to divert herself,—to procure a
bright to-day, and be impertinent, wherever she observed that impertinence was not
attended with danger.
The parts were now committed to memory: a rehearsal of the piece was ordered; the
count purposed to be present at it, and his lady began to feel anxious how he might
receive it. The baroness called Wilhelm to her privately. The nearer the hour
approached, they all displayed the more perplexity; for the truth was, that, of the
count's original idea, nothing whatever had been introduced. Jarno, who joined them
while consulting together, was admitted to the secret. He felt amused at the
contrivance, and was heartily disposed to offer the ladies his good services in carrying
it through. "It will go hard," said he, "if you cannot extricate yourselves without help
from this affair; but, at all events, I will wait, as a body of reserve." The baroness then
told them how she had on various occasions recited the whole piece to the count, but
only in fragments and without order; that consequently he was prepared for each
individual passage, yet certainly possessed with the idea that the whole would coincide
with his original conception. "I will sit by him," said she, "to-night at the rehearsal, and

study to divert his attention. The confectioner I have engaged already to make the
decoration as beautiful as possible, but as yet he has not quite completed it."
"I know of a court," said Jarno, "where I wish we had a few such active and prudent
friends as you. If your skill to-night will not suffice, give me a signal: I will take out the
count, and not let him in again till Minerva enter; and you have speedy aid to expect
from the illumination. For a day or two I have had something to report to him about
his cousin, which for various reasons I have hitherto postponed. It will give his
thoughts another turn, and that none of the pleasantest."
Business hindered the count from being present when the play began; the baroness
amused him after his arrival: Jarno's help was not required. For as the count had
abundance of employment in pointing out improvements, rectifying and arranging the
detached parts, he entirely forgot the purport of the whole; and, as at last Madam
Melina advanced, and spoke according to his heart, and the transparency did well, he
seemed completely satisfied. It was not till the whole was finished, and his guests were
sitting down to cards, that the difference appeared to strike him; and he began to
think whether after all this piece was actually of his invention. At a signal from the
baroness, Jarno then came forward into action; the evening passed away; the
intelligence of the prince's approach was confirmed; the people rode out more than
once to see his vanguard encamping in the neighborhood; the house was full of noise
and tumult; and our actors, not always served in the handsomest manner by unwilling
servants, had to pass their time in practisings and expectations at their quarters in the
old mansion, without any one particularly taking thought about them.

CHAPTER VIII.
At length the prince arrived, with all his generals, staff-officers, and suite
accompanying him. These, and the multitude of people coming to visit or do business
with him, made the castle like a beehive on the point of swarming. All pressed forward
to behold a man no less distinguished by his rank than by his great qualities, and all
admired his urbanity and condescension: all were astonished at finding the hero and
the leader of armies also the most accomplished and attractive courtier.
By the count's orders, the inmates of the castle were required to be all at their posts
when the prince arrived: not a player was allowed to show himself, that his Highness
might have no anticipation of the spectacle prepared to welcome him. Accordingly,
when at evening he was led into the lofty hall, glowing with light, and adorned with
tapestries of the previous century, he seemed not at all prepared to expect a play, and
still less a prelude in honor of himself. Every thing went off as it should have done: at
the conclusion of the show, the whole troop were called and presented individually to
the prince, who contrived, with the most pleasing and friendly air, to put some
question, or make some remark, to every one of them. Wilhelm, as author of the
piece, was particularly noticed, and had his tribute of applause liberally paid him.
The prelude being fairly over, no one asked another word about it: in a few days, it was
as if it never had existed; except that occasionally Jarno spoke of it to Wilhelm,
judiciously praised it, adding, however, "It is pity you should play with hollow nuts, for
a stake of hollow nuts." This expression stuck in Wilhelm's mind for several days: he
knew not how to explain it, or what to infer from it.
Meanwhile the company kept acting every night, as well as their capacities permitted;
each doing his utmost to attract the attention of spectators. Undeserved applauses
cheered them on: in their old castle they fully believed, that the great assemblage was
crowding thither solely on their account; that the multitude of strangers was allured by
their exhibitions; that they were the centre round which, and by means of which, the
whole was moving and revolving.
Wilhelm alone discovered, to his sorrow, that directly the reverse was true. For
although the prince had waited out the first exhibitions, sitting on his chair, with the
greatest conscientiousness, yet by degrees he grew remiss in his attendance, and
seized every plausible occasion of withdrawing. And those very people whom Wilhelm,
in conversation, had found to be the best informed and most sensible, with Jarno at

their head, were wont to spend but a few transitory moments in the hall of the
theatre; sitting for the rest of their time in the ante-chamber, gaming, or seeming to
employ themselves in business.
Amid all his persevering efforts, to want the wished and hoped for approbation grieved
Wilhelm very deeply. In the choice of plays, in transcribing the parts, in numerous
rehearsals, and whatever further could be done, he zealously co-operated with Melina,
who, being in secret conscious of his own insufficiency, at length acknowledged and
pursued these counsels. His own parts, Wilhelm diligently studied, and executed with
vivacity and feeling, and with all the propriety the little training he had yet received
would allow.
At the same time, the unwearied interest the baron took in their performances
obliterated every doubt from the minds of the rest of the company: he assured them
that their exhibitions were producing the deepest effect, especially while one of his
own pieces had been representing; only he was grieved to say, the prince showed an
exclusive inclination for the French theatre; while a part of his people, among whom
Jarno was especially distinguished, gave a passionate preference to the monstrous
productions of the English stage.
If in this way the art of our players was not adequately noticed and admired, their
persons on the other hand grew not entirely indifferent to all the gentlemen and all
the ladies of the audience. We observed above, that, from the very first, our actresses
had drawn upon them the attention of the young officers: in the sequel they were
luckier, and made more important conquests. But, omitting these, we shall merely
observe, that Wilhelm every day appeared more interesting to the countess; while in
him, too, a silent inclination towards her was beginning to take root. Whenever he was
on the stage, she could not turn her eyes from him; and, erelong, he seemed to play
and to recite with his face towards her alone. To look upon each other, was to them
the sweetest satisfaction; to which their harmless souls yielded without reserve,
without cherishing a bolder wish, or thinking about any consequence.
As two hostile outposts will sometimes peacefully and pleasantly converse together
across the river which divides them, not thinking of the war in which both their
countries are engaged: so did the countess exchange looks full of meaning with our
friend, across the vast chasm of birth and rank; both believing for themselves that they
might safely cherish their several emotions.

The baroness, in the mean time, had selected Laertes, who, being a spirited and lively
young man, pleased her very much; and who, woman-hater as he was, felt unwilling to
refuse a passing adventure. He would actually on this occasion have been fettered,
against his will, by the courteous and attractive nature of the baroness, had not the
baron done him accidentally a piece of good, or, if you will, of bad, service, by
instructing him a little in the habits and temper of this lady.
Laertes, happening once to celebrate her praises, and give her the preference to every
other of her sex, the baron, with a grin, replied, "I see how matters stand: our fair
friend has got a fresh inmate for her stalls." This luckless comparison, which pointed
too clearly to the dangerous caresses of the Circe, grieved poor Laertes to the heart:
he could not listen to the baron without spite and anger, as the latter continued
without mercy,—
"Every stranger thinks he is the first whom this delightful manner of proceeding has
concerned, but he is grievously mistaken; for we have all, at one time or another, been
trotted round this course. Man, youth, or boy, be who he like, each must devote
himself to her service for a season, must hang about her, and toil and long to gain her
favor."
To the happy man just entering the garden of an enchantress, and welcomed by all the
pleasures of an artificial spring, nothing can form a more unpleasant surprise, than if,
while his ear is watching and drinking in the music of the nightingales, some
transformed predecessor on a sudden grunts at his feet.
After this discovery, Laertes felt heartily ashamed that vanity should have again misled
him to think well, even in the smallest degree, of any woman whatsoever. He now
entirely forsook the baroness; kept by the Stallmeister, with whom he diligently fenced
and hunted; conducting himself at rehearsals and representations as if these were but
secondary matters.
The count and his lady would often in the mornings send for some of the company to
attend them, and all had continual cause to envy the undeserved good fortune of
Philina. The count kept his favorite, the Pedant, frequently for hours together, at his
toilet. This genius had been dressed out by degrees: he was now equipped and
furnished, even to watch and snuff-box.

Many times, too, particularly after dinner, the whole company were called out before
the noble guests,—an honor which the artists regarded as the most flattering in the
world; not observing, that on these very occasions the servants and huntsmen were
ordered to bring in a multitude of hounds, and to lead strings of horses about the court
of the castle.
Wilhelm had been counselled to praise Racine, the prince's favorite, and thereby to
attract some portion of his Highness's favor to himself. On one of these afternoons,
being summoned with the rest, he found an opportunity to introduce this topic. The
prince asked him if he diligently read the great French dramatic writers, to which
Wilhelm answered with a very eager "Yes." He did not observe that his Highness,
without waiting for the answer, was already on the point of turning round to some one
else: he fixed upon him, on the contrary, almost stepping in his way, and proceeded to
declare that he valued the French theatre very highly, and read the works of their
great masters with delight; particularly he had learned with true joy that his Highness
did complete justice to the great talents of Racine. "I can easily conceive," continued
he, "how people of high breeding and exalted rank must value a poet who has painted
so excellently and so truly the circumstances of their lofty station. Corneille, if I may
say so, has delineated great men; Racine, men of eminent rank. In reading his plays, I
can always figure to myself the poet as living at a splendid court, with a great king
before his eyes, in constant intercourse with the most distinguished persons, and
penetrating into the secrets of human nature, as it works concealed behind the
gorgeous tapestry of palaces. When I study his "Britannicus," his "Bérénice," it seems
as if I were transported in person to the court, were initiated into the great and the
little, in the habitations of these earthly gods: through the fine and delicate organs of
my author, I see kings whom a nation adores, courtiers whom thousands envy, in their
natural forms, with their failings and their pains. The anecdote of Racine's dying of a
broken heart, because Louis Fourteenth would no longer attend to him, and had
shown him his dissatisfaction, is to me the key to all his works. It was impossible that a
poet of his talents, whose life and death depended on the looks of a king, should not
write such works as a king and a prince might applaud."
Jarno had stepped near, and was listening with astonishment. The prince, who had
made no answer, and had only shown his approbation by an assenting look, now
turned aside; though Wilhelm, who did not know that it was contrary to etiquette to
continue a discussion under such circumstances, and exhaust a subject, would gladly

have spoken more, and convinced the prince that he had not read his favorite poet
without sensibility and profit.
"Have you never," said Jarno, taking him aside, "read one of Shakspeare's plays?"
"No," replied Wilhelm: "since the time when they became more known in Germany, I
have myself grown unacquainted with the theatre; and I know not whether I should
now rejoice that an old taste, and occupation of my youth, has been by chance
renewed. In the mean time, all I have heard of these plays has excited no wish to
become acquainted with such extraordinary monsters, which appear to set probability
and dignity alike at defiance."
"I would advise you," said the other, "to make a trial, notwithstanding: it can do one no
harm to look at what is extraordinary with one's own eyes. I will lend you a volume or
two; and you cannot better spend your time, than by casting every thing aside, and
retiring to the solitude of your old habitation, to look into the magic-lantern of that
unknown world. It is sinful of you to waste your hours in dressing out these apes to
look more human, and teaching dogs to dance. One thing only I require,—you must
not cavil at the form: the rest I can leave to your own good sense and feeling."
The horses were standing at the door; and Jarno mounted with some other cavaliers,
to go and hunt. Wilhelm looked after him with sadness. He would fain have spoken
much with this man, who, though in a harsh, unfriendly way, gave him new ideas,—
ideas he had need of.
Oftentimes a man, when approaching some development of his powers, capacities,
and conceptions, gets into a perplexity, from which a prudent friend might easily
deliver him. He resembles a traveller who, at but a short distance from the inn he is to
rest at, falls into the water: were any one to catch him then, and pull him to the bank,
with one good wetting it were over; whereas, though he struggles out himself, it is
often at the side where he tumbled in; and he has to make a wide and dreary circuit
before reaching his appointed object.
Wilhelm now began to have an inkling that things went forward in the world
differently from what he had supposed. He now viewed close at hand the solemn and
imposing life of the great and distinguished, and wondered at the easy dignity which
they contrived to give it. An army on its march, a princely hero at the head of it, such a
multitude of co-operating warriors, such a multitude of crowding worshippers, exalted

his imagination. In this mood he received the promised books; and erelong, as may be
easily supposed, the stream of that mighty genius laid hold of him, and led him down
to a shoreless ocean, where he soon completely forgot and lost himself.

CHAPTER IX.
The connection between the baron and the actors had suffered various changes since
the arrival of the latter. At the commencement it had been productive of great
satisfaction to both parties. As the baron for the first time in his life now saw one of
those plays, with which he had already graced a private theatre, put into the hands of
real actors, and in the fair way for a decent exhibition, he showed the benignest humor
in the world. He was liberal in gifts: he bought little presents for the actresses from
every millinery hawker, and contrived to send over many an odd bottle of champagne
to the actors. In return for all this, our company took every sort of trouble with his
play; and Wilhelm spared no diligence in learning, with extreme correctness, the
sublime speeches of that very eminent hero, whose part had fallen to his share.
But, in spite of all these kind reciprocities, some clouds by degrees arose between the
players and their patron. The baron's preference for certain actors became daily more
observable: this of necessity chagrined the rest. He exalted his favorites quite
exclusively, and thus, of course, introduced disunion and jealousy among the company.
Melina, without skill to help himself in dubious junctures, felt his situation very vexing.
The persons eulogized accepted of their praise, without being singularly thankful for it;
while the neglected gentlemen showed traces of their spleen by a thousand methods,
and constantly found means to make it very disagreeable for their once much-honored
patron to appear among them. Their spite received no little nourishment from a
certain poem, by an unknown author, which made a great sensation in the castle.
Previously to this the baron's intercourse with the company had given rise to many
little strokes of merriment; several stories had been raised about him; certain little
incidents, adorned with suitable additions, and presented in the proper light, had been
talked of, and made the subject of much bantering and laughter. At last it began to be
said that a certain rivalry of trade was arising between him and some of the actors,
who also looked upon themselves as writers. The poem we spoke of was founded
upon this report: it ran as follows:—
"Lord Baron, I, poor devil, ownWith envy, you your rank and state;Your station, too, so
near the throne;Of heirs your possessions great;Your father's seat, with walls and
mounds,His game-preserves, and hunting-grounds.
While me, poor devil, it appears,Lord Baron, you with envy view,Since Nature, from my
early years,Has held me like a mother true,With heart and head both light, I poor,But
no poor wight grew, to be sure.

My dear Lord Baron, now to meIt seems, we well alone should let,That you your
father's son still be,And I remain my mother's pet:Let's free from envy live, and
hate;Nor let's desire each other's title:No place you on Parnassus great,No noble rank I
in requital."—Editor's Version.
Upon this poem, which various persons were possessed of, in copies scarcely legible,
opinions were exceedingly divided. But who the author was, no one could guess; and,
as some began to draw a spiteful mirth from it, our friend expressed himself against it
very keenly.
"We Germans," he exclaimed, "deserve to have our Muses still continue in the low
contempt wherein they have languished so long; since we cannot value men of rank
who take a share in our literature, no matter how! Birth, rank, and fortune are no wise
incompatible with genius and taste; as foreign nations, reckoning among their best
minds a great number of noblemen, can fully testify. Hitherto, indeed, it has been rare
in Germany for men of high station to devote themselves to science; hitherto few
famous names have become more famous by their love of art and learning; while
many, on the other hand, have mounted out of darkness to distinction, and risen like
unknown stars on the horizon. Yet such will not always be the case; and I greatly err, if
the first classes of the nation are not even now in the way of also employing their
advantages to earn the fairest laurels of the Muses, at no distant date. Nothing,
therefore, grieves me more than to see the burgher jeering at the noble who can value
literature; nay, even men of rank themselves, with inconsiderate caprice, maliciously
scaring off their equal from a path where honor and contentment wait on all."
Apparently this latter observation pointed at the count, of whom Wilhelm had heard
that he liked the poem very much. In truth, this nobleman, accustomed to rally the
baron in his own peculiar way, was extremely glad of such an opportunity to plague his
kinsman more effectually. As to who the writer of the squib might be, each formed his
own hypothesis; and the count, never willing that another should surpass him in
acuteness, fell upon a thought, which, in a short time, he would have sworn to the
truth of. The verses could be written, he believed, by no one but his Pedant, who was a
very shrewd knave, and in whom, for a long while, he had noticed some touches of
poetic genius. By way of proper treat, he therefore caused the Pedant one morning to
be sent for, and made him read the poem, in his own manner, in presence of the
countess, the baroness, and Jarno,—a service he was paid for by applauses, praises,
and a present; and, on the count's inquiring if he had not still some other poems of an

earlier time, he cunningly contrived to evade the question. Thus did the Pedant get
invested with the reputation of a poet and a wit, and, in the eyes of the baron's
friends, of a pasquinader and a bad-hearted man. From that period, play as he might,
the count applauded him with greater zeal than ever; so that the poor wight grew at
last inflated till he nearly lost his senses, and began to meditate having a chamber in
the castle, like Philina.
Had this project been fulfilled at once, a great mishap might have been spared him. As
he was returning late one evening from the castle, groping about in the dark, narrow
way, he was suddenly laid hold of, and kept on the spot by some persons, while some
others rained a shower of blows upon him, and battered him so stoutly, that in a few
seconds he was lying almost dead upon the place, and could not without difficulty
crawl in to his companions. These, indignant as they seemed to be at such an outrage,
felt their secret joy in the adventure: they could hardly keep from laughing, at seeing
him so thoroughly curried, and his new brown coat bedusted through and through,
and bedaubed with white, as if he had had to do with millers.
The count, who soon got notice of the business, broke into a boundless rage. He
treated this act as the most heinous crime, called it an infringement of the Burgfried,
or peace of the castle, and caused his judge to make the strictest inquisition touching
it. The whited coat, it was imagined, would afford a leading proof. Every creature that
possibly could have the smallest trade with flour or powder in the castle was
submitted to investigation, but in vain.
The baron solemnly protested on his honor, that although this sort of jesting had
considerably displeased him, and the conduct of his lordship the count had not been
the friendliest, yet he had got over the affair; and with respect to the misfortune which
had come upon the poet, or pasquinader, or whatsoever his title might be, he knew
absolutely nothing, and had not the most remote concern in it.
The operations of the strangers, and the general commotion of the house, soon
effaced all recollection of the matter; and so, without redress, the unlucky favorite had
to pay dear for the satisfaction of pluming himself, a short while, in feathers not his
own.
Our troop, regularly acting every night, and on the whole very decently treated, now
began to make more clamorous demands, the better they were dealt with. Erelong
their victuals, drink, attendance, lodging, grew inadequate; and they called upon the

baron, their protector, to provide more liberally for them, and at last make good those
promises of comfortable entertainment, which he had been giving them so long. Their
complaints grew louder, and the efforts of our friend to still them more and more
abortive.
Meanwhile, excepting in rehearsals and hours of acting, Wilhelm scarcely ever came
abroad. Shut up in one of the remotest chambers, to which Mignon and the harper
alone had free access, he lived and moved in the Shakspearian world, feeling or
knowing nothing but the movements of his own mind.
We have heard of some enchanter summoning, by magic formulas, a vast multitude of
spiritual shapes into his cell. The conjurations are so powerful that the whole space of
the apartment is quickly full; and the spirits, crowding on to the verge of the little circle
which they must not pass, around this, and above the master's head, keep increasing
in number, and ever whirling in perpetual transformation. Every corner is crammed,
every crevice is possessed. Embryos expand themselves, and giant-forms contract into
the size of nuts. Unhappily the black-artist has forgot the counterword, with which he
might command this flood of sprites again to ebb.
So sat Wilhelm in his privacy: with unknown movements, a thousand feelings and
capacities awoke in him, of which he formerly had neither notion nor anticipation.
Nothing could allure him from this state: he was vexed and restless if any one
presumed to come to him, and talk of news or what was passing in the world.
Accordingly, he scarce took notice of the circumstance, when told that a judicial
sentence was about being executed in the castle-yard,—the flogging of a boy, who had
incurred suspicions of nocturnal housebreaking, and who, as he wore a peruke-maker's
coat, had most probably been one of the assaulters of the Pedant. The boy indeed, it
seemed, denied most obstinately; so that they could not inflict a formal punishment,
but meant to give him a slight memorial as a vagabond, and send him about his
business; he having prowled about the neighborhood for several days, lain at night in
the mills, and at last clapped a ladder to the garden-wall, and mounted over by it.
Our friend saw nothing very strange in the transaction, and was dismissing it
altogether, when Mignon came running in, and assured him that the criminal was
Friedrich, who, since the rencounter with the Stallmeister, had vanished from the
company, and not again been heard of.

Feeling an interest in the boy, Wilhelm hastily arose: he found, in the court-yard of the
castle, the preparations almost finished. The count loved solemnity on these
occasions. The boy being now led out, our friend stepped forward, and entreated for
delay, as he knew the boy, and had various things to say which might, perhaps, throw
light on the affair. He had difficulty in succeeding, notwithstanding all his statements:
at length, however, he did get permission to speak with the culprit in private. Friedrich
averred, that, concerning the assault in which the Pedant had been used so harshly, he
knew nothing whatever. He had merely been lurking about, and had come in at night
to see Philina, whose room he had discovered, and would certainly have reached, had
he not been taken by the way.
For the credit of the company, Wilhelm felt desirous not to have the truth of his
adventure published. He hastened to the Stallmeister: he begged him to show favor,
and, with his intimate knowledge of men and things about the castle, to find some
means of quashing the affair, and dismissing the boy.
This whimsical gentleman, by Wilhelm's help, invented a little story,—how the boy had
belonged to the troop, had run away from it, but soon wished to get back, and be
received again into his place; how he had accordingly been trying in the night to come
at certain of his well-wishers, and solicit their assistance. It was testified by others that
his former behavior had been good: the ladies put their hands to the work, and
Friedrich was let go.
Wilhelm took him in,—a third person in that strange family, which for some time he
had looked on as his own. The old man and little Mignon received the returning
wanderer kindly; and all the three combined to serve their friend and guardian with
attention, and procure him all the pleasure in their power.

CHAPTER X.
Philina now succeeded in insinuating farther every day into the favor of the ladies.
Whenever they were by themselves, she was wont to lead the conversation on the
men whom they saw about the castle; and our friend was not the last or least
important that engaged them. The cunning girl was well aware that he had made a
deep impression on the countess: she therefore talked about him often, telling much
that she knew or did not know, only taking care to speak of nothing that might be
interpreted against him; eulogizing, on the contrary, his nobleness of mind, his
generosity, and, more than all, his modest and respectful conduct to the fair sex. To all
inquiries made about him she replied with equal prudence; and the baroness, when
she observed the growing inclination of her amiable friend, was likewise very glad at
the discovery. Her own intrigues with several men, especially of late with Jarno, had
not remained hidden from the countess, whose pure soul could not look upon such
levities without disapprobation, and meek, though earnest, censures.
In this way both Philina and the baroness were personally interested in establishing a
closer intercourse between the countess and our friend. Philina hoped, moreover, that
there would occur some opportunity when she might once more labor for herself, and,
if possible, get back the favor of the young man she had lost.
One day his lordship, with his guests, had ridden out to hunt; and their return was not
expected till the morrow. On this the baroness devised a frolic, which was altogether in
her way, for she loved disguises, and, in order to surprise her friends, would suddenly
appear among them as a peasant-girl at one time, at another as a page, at another as a
hunter's boy. By which means she almost gave herself the air of a little fairy, that is
present everywhere, and exactly in the place where it is least expected. Nothing could
exceed this lady's joy, if, without being recognized, she could contrive to wait upon the
company for some time as a servant, or mix among them anyhow, and then at last in
some sportful way disclose herself.
Towards night she sent for Wilhelm to her chamber, and, happening to have
something else to do just then, left Philina to receive and prepare him.
He arrived, and found to his surprise, not the honorable lady, but the giddy girl, in the
room. She received him with a certain dignified openness of manner, which she had of
late been practising, and so constrained him likewise to be courteous.

At first she rallied him in general on the good fortune which pursued him everywhere,
and which, as she could not but see, had led him hither in the present case. Then she
delicately set before him the treatment with which of late he had afflicted her; she
blamed and upbraided herself; confessed that she had but too well deserved such
punishment; described with the greatest candor what she called her former situation;
adding, that she would despise herself, if she were not capable of altering, and making
herself worthy of his friendship.
Wilhelm was struck with this oration. He had too little knowledge of the world to
understand that persons quite unstable, and incapable of all improvement, frequently
accuse themselves in the bitterest manner, confessing and deploring their faults with
extreme ingenuousness, though they possess not the smallest power within them to
retire from that course, along which the irresistible tendency of their nature is
dragging them forward. Accordingly, he could not find in his heart to behave
inexorably to the graceful sinner: he entered into conversation, and learned from her
the project of a singular disguisement, wherewith it was intended to surprise the
countess.
He found some room for hesitation here, nor did he hide his scruples from Philina: but
the baroness, entering at this moment, left him not an instant for reflection; she
hurried him away with her, declaring it was just the proper hour.
It was now grown dark. She took him to the count's wardrobe, made him change his
own coat with his lordship's silk night-gown, and put the cap with red trimmings on his
head. She then led him forward to the cabinet; and bidding him sit down upon the
large chair, and take a book, she lit the Argand lamp which stood before him, and
showed him what he was to do, and what kind of part he had to play.
They would inform the countess, she said, of her husband's unexpected arrival, and
that he was in very bad humor. The countess would come in, walk up and down the
room once or twice, then place herself beside the back of his chair, lay her arm upon
his shoulder, and speak a few words. He was to play the cross husband as long and as
well as possible; and, when obliged to disclose himself, he must behave politely,
handsomely, and gallantly.
Wilhelm was left sitting, restlessly enough, in this singular mask. The proposal had
come upon him by surprise: the execution of it got the start of the deliberation. The
baroness had vanished from the room, before he saw how dangerous the post was

which he had engaged to fill. He could not deny that the beauty, the youth, the
gracefulness, of the countess had made some impression on him: but his nature was
entirely averse to all empty gallantry, and his principles forbade any thought of more
serious enterprises; so that his perplexity at this moment was in truth extreme. The
fear of displeasing the countess, and that of pleasing her too well, were equally busy in
his mind.
Every female charm that had ever acted on him, now showed itself again to his
imagination. Mariana rose before him in her white morning-gown, and entreated his
remembrance. Philina's loveliness, her beautiful hair, her insinuating blandishments,
had again become attractive by her late presence. Yet all this retired as if behind the
veil of distance, when he figured to himself the noble, blooming countess, whose arm
in a few minutes he would feel upon his neck, whose innocent caresses he was there
to answer.
The strange mode in which he was to be delivered out of this perplexity he certainly
did not anticipate. We may judge of his astonishment, nay, his terror, when the door
opened behind him; and, at the first stolen look in the mirror, he quite clearly
discerned the count coming in with a light in his hand. His doubt what he should do,
whether he should sit still or rise, should flee, confess, deny, or beg forgiveness, lasted
but a few instants. The count, who had remained motionless standing in the door,
retired, and shut it softly. At the same moment, the baroness sprang forward by the
side-door, extinguished the lamp, tore Wilhelm from his chair, and hurried him with
her into the closet. Instantly he threw off the night-gown, and put it in its former place.
The baroness took his coat under her arm, and hastened with him through several
rooms, passages, and partitions into her chamber, where Wilhelm, so soon as she
recovered breath, was informed, that on her going to the countess, and delivering the
fictitious intelligence about her husband's arrival, the countess had answered, "I know
it already: what can have happened? I saw him riding in, at the postern, even now." On
which the baroness, in an excessive panic, had run to the count's chamber to give
warning.
"Unhappily you came too late!" said Wilhelm. "The count was in the room before you,
and saw me sitting."
"And recognized you?"

"That I know not. He was looking at me in the glass, as I at him; and, before I could well
determine whether it was he or a spirit, he drew back, and closed the door behind
him."
The anxiety of the baroness increased, when a servant came to call her, signifying that
the count was with his lady. She went with no light heart, and found the count silent
and thoughtful, indeed, but milder and kinder in his words than usual. She knew not
what to think of it. They spoke about the incidents of the chase, and the causes of his
quick return. The conversation soon ran out. The count became taciturn; and it struck
the baroness particularly, when he asked for Wilhelm, and expressed a wish that he
were sent for, to come and read something.
Wilhelm, who had now dressed himself in the baroness's chamber, and in some degree
recovered his composure, obeyed the order, not without anxiety. The count gave him
a book, out of which he read an adventurous tale, very little at his ease. His voice had a
certain inconstancy and quivering in it, which fortunately corresponded with the
import of the story. The count more than once gave kindly tokens of approval, and at
last dismissed our friend, with praises of his exquisite manner of reading.

CHAPTER XI.
Wilhelm had scarcely read one or two of Shakspeare's plays, till their effect on him
became so strong that he could go no farther. His whole soul was in commotion. He
sought an opportunity to speak with Jarno; to whom, on meeting with him, he
expressed his boundless gratitude for such delicious entertainment.
"I clearly enough foresaw," said Jarno, "that you would not remain insensible to the
charms of the most extraordinary and most admirable of all writers."
"Yes!" exclaimed our friend: "I cannot recollect that any book, any man, any incident of
my life, has produced such important effects on me, as the precious works to which by
your kindness I have been directed. They seem as if they were performances of some
celestial genius, descending among men, to make them, by the mildest instructions,
acquainted with themselves. They are no fictions! You would think, while reading
them, you stood before the unclosed awful Books of Fate, while the whirlwind of most
impassioned life was howling through the leaves, and tossing them fiercely to and fro.
The strength and tenderness, the power and peacefulness, of this man, have so
astonished and transported me, that I long vehemently for the time when I shall have
it in my power to read farther."
"Bravo!" said Jarno, holding out his hand, and squeezing our friend's. "This is as it
should be! And the consequences, which I hope for, will likewise surely follow."
"I wish," said Wilhelm, "I could but disclose to you all that is going on within me even
now. All the anticipations I have ever had regarding man and his destiny, which have
accompanied me from youth upwards, often unobserved by myself, I find developed
and fulfilled in Shakspeare's writings. It seems as if he cleared up every one of our
enigmas to us, though we cannot say, Here or there is the word of solution. His men
appear like natural men, and yet they are not. These, the most mysterious and
complex productions of creation, here act before us as if they were watches, whose
dial-plates and cases were of crystal, which pointed out, according to their use, the
course of the hours and minutes; while, at the same time, you could discern the
combination of wheels and springs that turned them. The few glances I have cast over
Shakspeare's world incite me, more than any thing beside, to quicken my footsteps
forward into the actual world, to mingle in the flood of destinies that is suspended
over it, and at length, if I shall prosper, to draw a few cups from the great ocean of true

nature, and to distribute them from off the stage among the thirsting people of my
native land."
"I feel delighted with the temper of mind in which I now behold you," answered Jarno,
laying his hand upon the shoulder of the excited youth: "renounce not the purpose of
embarking in active life. Make haste to employ with alacrity the years that are granted
you. If I can serve you, I will with all my heart. As yet I have not asked you how you
came into this troop, for which you certainly were neither born nor bred. So much I
hope and see,—you long to be out of it. I know nothing of your parentage, of your
domestic circumstances: consider what you shall confide to me. Thus much only I can
say: the times of war we live in may produce quick turns of fortune; did you incline
devoting your strength and talents to our service, not fearing labor, and, if need were,
danger, I might even now have an opportunity to put you in a situation, which you
would not afterwards be sorry to have filled for a time." Wilhelm could not sufficiently
express his gratitude: he was ready to impart to his friend and patron the whole
history of his life.
In the course of this conversation, they had wandered far into the park, and at last
came upon the highway that crossed it. Jarno stood silent for a moment, and then
said, "Deliberate on my proposal, determine, give me your answer in a few days, and
then let me have the narrative you mean to trust me with. I assure you, it has all along
to me seemed quite incomprehensible how you ever could have any thing to do with
such a class of people. I have often thought with spleen and disgust, how, in order to
gain a paltry living, you must fix your heart on a wandering ballad-monger, and a silly
mongrel, neither male nor female."
He had not yet concluded, when an officer on horseback came hastily along; a groom
following him with a led horse. Jarno shouted a warm salutation to him. The officer
sprang from his horse; Jarno and he embraced and talked together; while Wilhelm,
confounded at the last expressions of his warlike friend, stood thoughtfully at a side.
Jarno turned over some papers which the stranger had delivered to him; while the
latter came to Wilhelm, held out his hand, and said with emphasis, "I find you in
worthy company: follow the counsel of your friend, and, by doing so, accomplish
likewise the desire of an unknown man, who takes a genuine interest in you." So
saying, he embraced Wilhelm, and pressed him cordially to his breast. At the same
instant Jarno advanced, and said to the stranger, "It is best that I ride on with you: by

this means you may get the necessary orders, and set out again before night." Both
then leaped into their saddles, and left our astonished friend to his own reflections.
Jarno's last words were still ringing in his ears. It galled him to see the two human
beings that had most innocently won his affections so grievously disparaged by a man
whom he honored so much. The strange embracing of the officer, whom he knew not,
made but a slight impression on him; it occupied his curiosity and his imagination for a
moment: but Jarno's speech had cut him to the heart; he was deeply hurt by it: and
now, in his way homewards, he broke out into reproaches against himself, that he
should for a single instant have mistaken or forgotten the unfeeling coldness of Jarno,
which looked out from his very eyes, and spoke in all his gestures. "No!" exclaimed he,
"thou conceivest, dead-hearted worldling, that thou canst be a friend! All that thou
hast power to offer me is not worth the sentiment which binds me to these forlorn
beings. How fortunate that I have discovered in time what I had to expect from thee!"
Mignon came to meet him as he entered: he clasped her in his arms, exclaiming,
"Nothing, nothing, shall part us, thou good little creature! The seeming prudence of
the world shall never cause me to forsake thee, or forget what I owe thee!"
The child, whose warm caresses he had been accustomed to avoid, rejoiced with all
her heart at this unlooked-for show of tenderness, and clung so fast to him that he had
some difficulty to get loose from her.
From this period he kept a stricter eye on Jarno's conduct: many parts of it he did not
think quite praiseworthy; nay, several things came out which totally displeased him. He
had strong suspicions, for example, that the verses on the baron, which the poor
Pedant had so dearly paid for, were composed by Jarno. And as the latter, in Wilhelm's
presence, had made sport of the adventure, our friend thought here was certainly a
symptom of a most corrupted heart; for what could be more depraved than to treat a
guiltless person, whose griefs one's self had occasioned, with jeering and mockery,
instead of trying to satisfy or to indemnify him? In this matter Wilhelm would himself
willingly have brought about reparation; and erelong a very curious accident led him to
obtain some traces of the persons concerned in that nocturnal outrage.
Hitherto his friends had contrived to keep him unacquainted with the fact, that some
of the young officers were in the habit of passing whole nights in merriment and jollity,
with certain actors and actresses, in the lower hall of the old castle. One morning,
having risen early, according to his custom, he happened to visit this chamber, and

found the gallant gentlemen just in the act of performing rather a singular operation.
They had mixed a bowl of water with a quantity of chalk, and were plastering this gruel
with a brush upon their waistcoats and pantaloons, without stripping; thus very
expeditiously restoring the spotlessness of their apparel. On witnessing this piece of
ingenuity, our friend was at once struck with the recollection of the poor Pedant's
whited and bedusted coat: his suspicions gathered strength when he learned that
some relations of the baron were among the party.
To throw some light on his doubts, he engaged the youths to breakfast with him. They
were very lively, and told a multitude of pleasant stories. One of them especially, who
for a time had been on the recruiting-service, was loud in praising the craft and activity
of his captain; who, it appeared, understood the art of alluring men of all kinds
towards him, and overreaching every one by the deception proper for him. He
circumstantially described how several young people of good families and careful
education had been cozened, by playing off to them a thousand promises of honor and
preferment; and he heartily laughed at the simpletons, who felt so gratified, when first
enlisted, at the thought of being esteemed and introduced to notice by so reputable,
prudent, bold, and munificent an officer.
Wilhelm blessed his better genius for having drawn him back in time from the abyss to
whose brink he had approached so near. Jarno he now looked upon as nothing better
than a crimp: the embrace of the stranger officer was easily explained. He viewed the
feelings and opinions of these men with contempt and disgust; from that moment he
carefully avoided coming into contact with any one that wore a uniform; and, when he
heard that the army was about to move its quarters, the news would have been
extremely welcome to him, if he had not feared, that, immediately on its departure, he
himself must be banished from the neighborhood of his lovely friend, perhaps forever.

CHAPTER XII.
Meanwhile the baroness had spent several days disquieted by anxious fears and
unsatisfied curiosity. Since the late adventure, the count's demeanor had been
altogether an enigma to her. His manner was changed: none of his customary jokes
were to be heard. His demands on the company and the servants had very much
abated. Little pedantry or imperiousness was now to be discerned in him; he was silent
and thoughtful, yet withal he seemed composed and placid; in short, he was quite
another man. In choosing the books, which now and then he caused to be read to him,
those of a serious, often a religious, cast, were pitched upon; and the baroness lived in
perpetual fright lest, beneath this apparent serenity, a secret rancor might be
lurking,—a silent purpose to revenge the offence he had so accidentally discovered.
She determined, therefore, to make Jarno her confidant; and this the more freely, as
that gentleman and she already stood in a relation to each other where it is not usual
to be very cautious in keeping secrets. For some time Jarno had been her dearest
friend, yet they had been dexterous enough to conceal their attachment and joys from
the noisy world in which they moved. To the countess alone this new romance had not
remained unknown; and very possibly the baroness might wish to get her fair friend
occupied with some similar engagement, and thus to escape the silent reproaches she
had often to endure from that noble-minded woman.
Scarcely had the baroness related the occurrence to her lover, when he cried out
laughing, "To a certainty the old fool believes that he has seen his ghost! He dreads
that the vision may betoken some misfortune, perhaps death, to him; and so he is
become quite tame, as all half-men do, in thinking of that consummation which no one
has escaped or will escape. Softly a little! As I hope he will live long enough, we may
now train him at least, so that he shall not again give disturbance to his wife and
household."
They accordingly, as soon as any opportunity occurred, began talking, in the presence
of the count, about warnings, visions, apparitions, and the like. Jarno played the
sceptic, the baroness likewise; and they carried it so far, that his lordship at last took
Jarno aside, reproved him for his free-thinking, and produced his own experience to
prove the possibility, nay, actual occurrence, of such preternatural events. Jarno
affected to be struck, to be in doubt, and finally to be convinced; but, in private with
his friend, he made himself so much the merrier at the credulous weakling, who had

thus been cured of his evil habits by a bugbear, but who, they admitted, still deserved
some praise for expecting dire calamity, or death itself, with such composure.
"The natural result which the present apparition might have had, would possibly have
ruffled him!" exclaimed the baroness, with her wonted vivacity; to which, when
anxiety was taken from her heart, she had instantly returned. Jarno was richly
rewarded; and the two contrived fresh projects for frightening the count still further,
and still further exciting and confirming the affection of the countess for Wilhelm.
With this intention, the whole story was related to the countess. She, indeed,
expressed her displeasure at such conduct; but from that time she became more
thoughtful, and in peaceful moments seemed to be considering, pursuing, and painting
out that scene which had been prepared for her.
The preparations now going forward on every side left no room for doubt that the
armies were soon to move in advance, and the prince at the same time to change his
headquarters. It was even said that the count intended leaving his castle, and
returning to the city. Our players could therefore, without difficulty, calculate the
aspect of their stars; yet none of them, except Melina, took any measures in
consequence: the rest strove only to catch as much enjoyment as they could from the
moment that was passing over them.
Wilhelm, in the mean time, was engaged with a peculiar task. The countess had
required from him a copy of his writings, and he looked on this request as the noblest
recompense for his labors.
A young author, who has not yet seen himself in print, will, in such a case, apply no
ordinary care to provide a clear and beautiful transcript of his works. It is like the
golden age of authorship: he feels transported into those centuries when the press had
not inundated the world with so many useless writings, when none but excellent
performances were copied, and kept by the noblest men; and he easily admits the
illusion, that his own accurately ruled and measured manuscript may itself prove an
excellent performance, worthy to be kept and valued by some future critic.
The prince being shortly to depart, a great entertainment had been appointed in honor
of him. Many ladies of the neighborhood were invited, and the countess had dressed
betimes. On this occasion she had taken a costlier suit than usual. Her head-dress, and

the decorations of her hair, were more exquisite and studied: she wore all her jewels.
The baroness, too, had done her utmost to appear with becoming taste and splendor.
Philina, observing that both ladies, in expectation of their guests, felt the time rather
tedious, proposed to send for Wilhelm, who was wishing to present his manuscript,
now completed, and to read them some other little pieces. He came, and on his
entrance was astonished at the form and the graces of the countess, which her
decorations had but made more visible and striking. Being ordered by the ladies, he
began to read; but with so much absence of mind, and so badly, that, had not his
audience been excessively indulgent, they would very soon have dismissed him.
Every time he looked at the countess, it seemed to him as if a spark of electric fire
were glancing before his eyes. In the end he knew not where to find the breath he
wanted for his reading. The countess had always pleased him, but now it appeared as
if he never had beheld a being so perfect and so lovely. A thousand thoughts flitted up
and down his soul: what follows might be nearly their substance.
"How foolish is it in so many poets, and men of sentiment as they are called, to make
war on pomp and decoration; requiring that women of all ranks should wear no dress
but what is simple, and conformable to nature! They rail at decoration, without once
considering, that, when we see a plain or positively ugly person clothed in a costly and
gorgeous fashion, it is not the poor decoration that displeases us. I would assemble all
the judges in the world, and ask them here if they wished to see one of these folds, of
these ribbons and laces, these braids, ringlets, and glancing stones, removed? Would
they not dread disturbing the delightful impression that so naturally and
spontaneously meets us here? Yes, naturally I will say! As Minerva sprang in complete
armor from the head of Jove; so does this goddess seem to have stepped forth with a
light foot, in all her ornaments, from the bosom of some flower."
While reading, he turned his eyes upon her frequently, as if he wished to stamp this
image on his soul forever: he more than once read wrong, yet without falling into
confusion of mind; though, at other times, he used to feel the mistaking of a word or a
letter as a painful deformity, which spoiled a whole recitation.
A false alarm of the arrival of the guests put an end to the reading; the baroness went
out; and the countess, while about to shut her writing-desk, which was standing open,
took up her casket, and put some other rings upon her finger. "We are soon to part,"
said she, keeping her eyes upon the casket: "accept a memorial of a true friend, who

wishes nothing more earnestly than that you may always prosper." She then took out a
ring, which, underneath a crystal, bore a little plait of woven hair beautifully set with
diamonds. She held it out to Wilhelm, who, on taking it, knew neither what to say nor
do, but stood as if rooted to the ground. The countess shut her desk, and sat down
upon the sofa.
"And I must go empty?" said Philina, kneeling down at the countess's right hand. "Do
but look at the man: he carries such a store of words in his mouth, when no one wants
to hear them; and now he cannot stammer out the poorest syllable of thanks. Quick,
sir! Express your services by way of pantomime at least; and if to-day you can invent
nothing, then, for Heaven's sake, be my imitator."
Philina seized the right hand of the countess, and kissed it warmly. Wilhelm sank upon
his knee, laid hold of the left, and pressed it to his lips. The countess seemed
embarrassed, yet without displeasure.
"Ah!" cried Philina, "so much splendor of attire, I may have seen before, but never one
so fit to wear it. What bracelets, but also what a hand! What a neckdress, but also
what a bosom."
"Peace, little cozener!" said the countess.
"Is this his lordship, then?" said Philina, pointing to a rich medallion, which the
countess wore on her left side, by a particular chain.
"He is painted in his bridegroom-dress," replied the countess.
"Was he, then, so young?" inquired Philina: "I know it is but a year or two since you
were married."
"His youth must be placed to the artist's account," replied the lady.
"He is a handsome man," observed Philina. "But was there never," she continued,
placing her hand on the countess's heart, "never any other image that found its way in
secret hither?"
"Thou art very bold, Philina," cried she: "I have spoiled thee. Let me never hear the like
again."

"If you are angry, then am I unhappy," said Philina, springing up, and hastening from
the room.
Wilhelm still held that lovely hand in both of his. His eyes were fixed on the braceletclasp: he noticed, with extreme surprise, that his initials were traced on it, in lines of
brilliants.
"Have I, then," he modestly inquired, "your own hair in this precious ring?"
"Yes," replied she in a faint voice; then, suddenly collecting herself, she said, and
pressed his hand, "Arise, and fare you well!"
"Here is my name," cried he, "by the most curious chance!" He pointed to the braceletclasp.
"How?" cried the countess: "it is the cipher of a female friend!"
"They are the initials of my name. Forget me not. Your image is engraven on my heart,
and will never be effaced. Farewell! I must be gone."
He kissed her hand, and meant to rise; but, as in dreams, some strange thing fades and
changes into something stranger, and the succeeding wonder takes us by surprise; so,
without knowing how it happened, he found the countess in his arms: her lips were
resting upon his, and their warm mutual kisses were yielding them that blessedness
which mortals sip from the topmost sparkling foam on the freshly poured cup of love.
Her head lay on his shoulder: the disordered ringlets and ruffles were forgotten. She
had thrown her arm round him: he clasped her with vivacity, and pressed her again
and again to his breast. Oh that such a moment could but last forever! And woe to
envious Fate that shortened even this brief moment to our friends!
How terrified was Wilhelm, how astounded did he start from his happy dream, when
the countess, with a shriek, on a sudden tore herself away, and hastily pressed her
hand against her heart.
He stood confounded before her: she held the other hand upon her eyes, and, after a
moment's pause, exclaimed, "Away! leave me! delay not!"
He continued standing.

"Leave me!" she cried; and, taking off her hand from her eyes, she looked at him with
an indescribable expression of countenance, and added, in the most tender and
affecting voice, "Flee, if you love me."
Wilhelm was out of the chamber, and again in his room, before he knew what he was
doing.
Unhappy creatures! What singular warning of chance or of destiny tore them asunder?

BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
Laertes was standing at the window in a thoughtful mood, resting on his arm, and
looking out into the fields. Philina came gliding towards him, across the large hall: she
leaned upon him, and began to mock him for his serious looks.
"Do not laugh," replied he: "it is frightful to think how time goes on, how all things
change and have an end. See here! A little while ago there was a stately camp: how
pleasantly the tents looked! what restless life and motion was within them! how
carefully they watched the whole enclosure! And, behold, it is all vanished in a day! For
a short while, that trampled straw, those holes which the cooks have dug, will show a
trace of what was here; and soon the whole will be ploughed and reaped as formerly,
and the presence of so many thousand gallant fellows in this quarter will but glimmer
in the memories of one or two old men."
Philina began to sing, and dragged forth her friend to dance with her in the hall. "Since
Time is not a person we can overtake when he is past," cried she, "let us honor him
with mirth and cheerfulness of heart while he is passing."
They had scarcely made a step or two, when Frau Melina came walking through the
hall. Philina was wicked enough to invite her to join them in the dance, and thus to
bring her in mind of the shape to which her pregnancy had reduced her.
"That I might never more see a woman in an interesting situation!" said Philina, when
her back was turned.
"Yet she feels an interest in it," said Laertes.
"But she manages so shockingly. Didst thou notice that wabbling fold of her shortened
petticoat, which always travels out before her when she moves? She has not the
smallest knack or skill to trim herself a little, and conceal her state."
"Let her be," said Laertes. "Time will soon come to her aid."
"It were prettier, however," cried Philina, "if we could shake children from the trees."

The baron entered, and spoke some kind words to them, adding a few presents, in the
name of the count and the countess, who had left the place very early in the morning.
He then went to Wilhelm, who was busy in the side-chamber with Mignon. She had
been extremely affectionate and taking; had asked minutely about Wilhelm's parents,
brothers, sisters, and relations; and so brought to his mind the duty he owed his
people, to send them some tidings of himself.
With the farewell compliments of the family, the baron delivered him an assurance
from the count, that his lordship had been exceedingly obliged by his acting, his
poetical labors, and theatrical exertions. For proof of this statement, the baron then
drew forth a purse, through whose beautiful texture the bright glance of new gold coin
was sparkling out. Wilhelm drew back, refusing to accept of it.
"Look upon this gift," said the baron, "as a compensation for your time, as an
acknowledgment of your trouble, not as the reward of your talents. If genius procures
us a good name and good will from men, it is fair likewise, that, by our diligence and
efforts, we should earn the means to satisfy our wants; since, after all, we are not
wholly spirit. Had we been in town, where every thing is to be got, we should have
changed this little sum into a watch, a ring, or something of that sort; but, as it is, I
must place the magic rod in your own hands; procure a trinket with it, such as may
please you best and be of greatest use, and keep it for our sakes. At the same time,
you must not forget to hold the purse in honor. It was knit by the fingers of our ladies:
they meant that the cover should give to its contents the most pleasing form."
"Forgive my embarrassment," said Wilhelm, "and my doubts about accepting this
present. It, as it were, annihilates the little I have done, and hinders the free play of
happy recollection. Money is a fine thing, when any matter is to be completely settled
and abolished: I feel unwilling to be so entirely abolished from the recollection of your
house."
"That is not the case," replied the baron; "but, feeling so tenderly yourself, you could
not wish that the count should be obliged to consider himself wholly your debtor,
especially when I assure you that his lordship's highest ambition has always consisted
in being punctual and just. He is not uninformed of the labor you have undergone, or
of the zeal with which you have devoted all your time to execute his views; nay, he is
aware, that, to quicken certain operations, you have even expended money of your
own. With what face shall I appear before him, then, if I cannot say that his
acknowledgment has given you satisfaction?"

"If I thought only of myself," said Wilhelm, "if I might follow merely the dictates of my
own feelings, I should certainly, in spite of all these reasons, steadfastly refuse this gift,
generous and honorable as it is; but I will not deny, that, at the very moment when it
brings me into one perplexity, it frees me from another, into which I have lately fallen
with regard to my relations, and which has in secret caused me much uneasiness. My
management, not only of the time, but also of the money, for which I have to give
account, has not been the best; and now, by the kindness of his lordship, I shall be
enabled, with confidence, to give my people news of the good fortune to which this
curious by-path has led me. I therefore sacrifice those feelings of delicacy, which, like a
tender conscience, admonish us on such occasions, to a higher duty; and, that I may
appear courageously before my father, I must consent to stand ashamed before you."
"It is singular," replied the baron, "to see what a world of hesitation people feel about
accepting money from their friends and patrons, though ready to receive any other gift
with joy and thankfulness. Human nature manifests some other such peculiarities, by
which many scruples of a similar kind are produced and carefully cherished."
"Is it not the same with all points of honor?" said our friend.
"It is so," replied the baron, "and with several other prejudices. We must not root
them out, lest in doing so we tear up noble plants along with them. Yet I am always
glad when I meet with men that feel superior to such objections, when the case
requires it; and I recall with pleasure the story of that ingenious poet who had written
several plays for the court-theatre, which met with the monarch's warmest
approbation. 'I must give him a distinguished recompense,' said the generous prince:
'ask him whether he would choose to have some jewel given him, or if he would
disdain to accept a sum of money.' In his humorous way, the poet answered the
inquiring courtier, 'I am thankful, with all my heart, for these gracious purposes; and,
as the emperor is daily taking money from us, I see not wherefore I should feel
ashamed of taking some from him.'"
Scarcely had the baron left the room, when Wilhelm eagerly began to count the cash,
which had come to him so unexpectedly, and, as he thought, so undeservedly. It
seemed as if the worth and dignity of gold, not usually felt till later years, had now, by
anticipation, twinkled in his eyes for the first time, as the fine, glancing coins rolled out
from the beautiful purse. He reckoned up, and found, that, particularly as Melina had
engaged immediately to pay the loan, he had now as much or more on the right side of
his account as on that day when Philina first asked him for the nosegay. With a little

secret satisfaction, he looked upon his talents; with a little pride, upon the fortune
which had led and attended him. He now seized the pen, with an assured mind, to
write a letter which might free his family from their anxieties, and set his late
proceedings in the most favorable light. He abstained from any special narrative, and
only by significant and mysterious hints left them room for guessing at what had
befallen him. The good condition of his cash-book, the advantage he had earned by his
talents, the favor of the great and of the fair, acquaintance with a wider circle, the
improvement of his bodily and mental gifts, his hopes from the future, altogether
formed such a fair cloud-picture, that Fata Morgana itself could scarcely have thrown
together a stranger or a better.
In this happy exaltation, the letter being folded up, he went on to maintain a
conversation with himself, recapitulating what he had been writing, and pointing out
for himself an active and glorious future. The example of so many gallant warriors had
fired him; the poetry of Shakspeare had opened a new world to him; from the lips of
the beautiful countess he had inhaled an inexpressible inspiration. All this could not
and would not be without effect.
The Stallmeister came to inquire whether they were ready with their packing. Alas!
with the single exception of Melina, no one of them had thought of it. Now, however,
they were speedily to be in motion. The count had engaged to have the whole party
conveyed forward a few days' journey on their way: the horses were now in readiness,
and could not long be wanted. Wilhelm asked for his trunk: Frau Melina had taken it to
put her own things in. He asked for money: Herr Melina had stowed it all far down at
the bottom of his box. Philina said she had still some room in hers: she took Wilhelm's
clothes, and bade Mignon bring the rest. Wilhelm, not without reluctance, was obliged
to let it be so.
While they were loading, and getting all things ready, Melina said, "I am sorry we
should travel like mountebanks and rope-dancers. I could wish that Mignon would put
on girl's clothes, and that the harper would let his beard be shorn." Mignon clung
firmly to Wilhelm, and cried, with great vivacity, "I am a boy—I will be no girl!" The old
man held his peace; and Philina, on this suggestion, made some merry observations on
the singularity of their protector, the count. "If the harper should cut off his beard,"
said she, "let him sew it carefully upon a ribbon, and keep it by him, that he may put it
on again whenever his lordship the count falls in with him in any quarter of the world.
It was this beard alone that procured him the favor of his lordship."

On being pressed to give an explanation of this singular speech, Philina said to them,
"The count thinks it contributes very much to the completeness of theatrical illusion if
the actor continues to play his part, and to sustain his character, even in common life.
It was for this reason that he showed such favor to the Pedant: and he judged it, in like
manner, very fitting that the harper not only wore his false beard at nights on the
stage, but also constantly by day; and he used to be delighted at the natural
appearance of the mask."
While the rest were laughing at this error, and the other strange opinions of the count,
the harper led our friend aside, took leave of him, and begged, with tears, that he
would even now let him go. Wilhelm spoke to him, declaring that he would protect
him against all the world; that no one should touch a hair of his head, much less send
him off against his will.
The old man seemed affected deeply: an unwonted fire was glowing in his eyes. "It is
not that," cried he, "which drives me away. I have long been reproaching myself in
secret for staying with you. I ought to linger nowhere; for misfortune flies to overtake
me, and injures all that are connected with me. Dread every thing, unless you dismiss
me; but ask me no questions. I belong not to myself. I cannot stay."
"To whom dost thou belong? Who can exert such a power on thee?"
"Leave me my horrid secret, and let me go! The vengeance which pursues me is not of
the earthly judge. I belong to an inexorable destiny. I cannot stay, and I dare not."
"In the situation I see thee in, I shall certainly not let thee go."
"It were high treason against you, my benefactor, if I should delay. I am secure while
with you, but you are in peril. You know not whom you keep beside you. I am guilty,
but more wretched than guilty. My presence scares happiness away, and good deeds
grow powerless when I become concerned in them. Fugitive, unresting I should be,
that my evil genius might not seize me, which pursues but at a distance, and only
appears when I have found a place, and am laying down my head to seek repose. More
grateful I cannot show myself than by forsaking you."
"Strange man! Thou canst neither take away the confidence I place in thee, nor the
hope I feel to see thee happy. I wish not to penetrate the secrets of thy superstition;
but if thou livest in belief of wonderful forebodings, and entanglements of fate, then,

to cheer and hearten thee, I say, unite thyself to my good fortune, and let us see which
genius is the stronger, thy dark or my bright one."
Wilhelm seized this opportunity of suggesting to him many other comfortable things;
for of late our friend had begun to imagine that this singular attendant of his must be a
man, who, by chance or destiny, had been led into some weighty crime, the
remembrance of which he was ever bearing on his conscience.
A few days ago Wilhelm, listening to his singing, had observed attentively the following
lines:—
"For him the light of ruddy mornBut paints the horizon red with flame;And voices,
from the depths of nature borne,Woe! woe! upon his guilty head proclaim."
But, let the old man urge what arguments he pleased, our friend had constantly a
stronger argument at hand. He turned every thing on its fairest side; spoke so bravely,
heartily, and cheerily, that even the old man seemed again to gather spirits, and to
throw aside his whims.

CHAPTER II.
Melina was in hopes to get established, with his company, in a small but thriving town
at some distance. They had already reached the place where the count's horses were
to turn, and now they looked about for other carriages and cattle to transport them
onward. Melina had engaged to provide them a conveyance: he showed himself but
niggardly, according to his custom. Wilhelm, on the contrary, had the shining ducats of
the countess in his pocket, and thought he had the fullest right to spend them merrily;
forgetting very soon how ostentatiously he had produced them in the stately balance
transmitted to his father.
His friend Shakspeare, whom with the greatest joy he acknowledged as his godfather,
and rejoiced the more that his name was Wilhelm, had introduced him to a prince,
who frolicked for a time among mean, nay, vicious companions, and who,
notwithstanding his nobleness of nature, found pleasure in the rudeness, indecency,
and coarse intemperance of these altogether sensual knaves. This ideal likeness, which
he figured as the type and the excuse of his own actual condition, was most welcome
to our friend; and the process of self-deception, to which already he displayed an
almost invincible tendency, was thereby very much facilitated.
He now began to think about his dress. It struck him that a waistcoat, over which, in
case of need, one could throw a little short mantle, was a very fit thing for a traveller.
Long knit pantaloons, and a pair of lacing-boots, seemed the true garb of a pedestrian.
He next procured a fine silk sash, which he tied about him, under the pretence at first
of securing warmth for his person. On the other hand, he freed his neck from the
tyranny of stocks, and got a few stripes of muslin sewed upon his shirt; making the
pieces of considerable breadth, so that they presented the complete appearance of an
ancient ruff. The beautiful silk neckerchief, the memorial of Mariana, which had once
been saved from burning, now lay slackly tied beneath this muslin collar. A round hat,
with a party-colored band, and a large feather, perfected the mask.
The women all asserted that this garb became him very well. Philina in particular
appeared enchanted with it. She solicited his hair for herself,—beautiful locks, which,
the closer to approach the natural ideal, he had unmercifully clipped. By so doing she
recommended herself not amiss to his favor; and our friend, who by his openhandedness had acquired the right of treating his companions somewhat in Prince
Harry's manner, erelong fell into the humor of himself contriving a few wild tricks, and
presiding in the execution of them. The people fenced, they danced, they devised all

kinds of sports, and, in their gayety of heart, partook of what tolerable wine they could
fall in with in copious proportions; while, amid the disorder of this tumultuous life,
Philina lay in wait for the coy hero,—over whom let his better genius keep watch!
One chief diversion, which yielded the company a frequent and very pleasing
entertainment, consisted in producing an extempore play, in which their late
benefactors and patrons were mimicked, and turned into ridicule. Some of our actors
had seized very neatly whatever was peculiar in the outward manner of several
distinguished people in the count's establishment; their imitation of these was
received by the rest of the party with the greatest approbation: and when Philina
produced, from the secret archives of her experience, certain peculiar declarations of
love that had been made to her, the audience were like to die with laughing and
malicious joy.
Wilhelm censured their ingratitude; but they told him in reply that these gentry well
deserved what they were getting, their general conduct toward such deserving people,
a sour friends believed themselves, not having been by any means the best imaginable.
The little consideration, the neglect they had experienced, were now described with
many aggravations. The jesting, bantering, and mimicry proceeded as before: our party
were growing bitterer and more unjust every minute.
"I wish," observed Wilhelm, "there were no envy or selfishness lurking under what you
say, but that you would regard those persons and their station in the proper point of
view. It is a peculiar thing to be placed, by one's very birth, in an elevated situation in
society. The man for whom inherited wealth has secured a perfect freedom of
existence; who finds himself from his youth upwards abundantly encompassed with all
the secondary essentials, so to speak, of human life,—will generally become
accustomed to consider these qualifications as the first and greatest of all; while the
worth of that mode of human life, which nature from her own stores equips and
furnishes, will strike him much more faintly. The behavior of noblemen to their
inferiors, and likewise to each other, is regulated by external preferences. They give
each credit for his title, his rank, his clothes, and equipage; but his individual merits
come not into play."
This speech was honored with the company's unbounded applause. They declared it to
be shameful, that men of merit should constantly be pushed into the background; and
that, in the great world, there should not be a trace of natural and hearty intercourse.
On this latter point particularly they overshot all bounds.

"Blame them not for it," said Wilhelm, "rather pity them! They have seldom an exalted
feeling of that happiness which we admit to be the highest that can flow from the
inward abundance of nature. Only to us poor creatures is it granted to enjoy the
happiness of friendship in its richest fulness. Those dear to us we cannot elevate by
our countenance, or advance by our favor, or make happy by our presents. We have
nothing but ourselves. This whole self we must give away; and, if it is to be of any
value, we must make our friend secure of it forever. What an enjoyment, what a
happiness, for giver and receiver! With what blessedness does truth of affection invest
our situation! It gives to the transitory life of man a heavenly certainty: it forms the
crown and capital of all that we possess."
While he spoke thus, Mignon had come near him: she threw her little arms round him,
and stood with her cheek resting on his breast. He laid his hand on the child's head,
and proceeded, "It is easy for a great man to win our minds to him, easy to make our
hearts his own. A mild and pleasant manner, a manner only not inhuman, will of itself
do wonders,—and how many means does he possess of holding fast the affections he
has once conquered? To us, all this occurs less frequently; to us it is all more difficult;
and we naturally, therefore, put a greater value on whatever, in the way of mutual
kindness, we acquire and accomplish. What touching examples of faithful servants
giving themselves up to danger and death for their masters? How finely has
Shakspeare painted out such things to us! Fidelity, in this case, is the effort of a noble
soul, struggling to become equal with one exalted above it. By steadfast attachment
and love, the servant is made equal to his lord, who, but for this, is justified in looking
on him as a hired slave. Yes, these virtues belong to the lower class of men alone: that
class cannot do without them, and with them it has a beauty of its own. Whoever is
enabled to requite all favors easily will likewise easily be tempted to raise himself
above the habit of acknowledgment. Nay, in this sense, I am of opinion it might almost
be maintained, that a great man may possess friends, but cannot be one."
Mignon clung more and more closely to him.
"It may be so," replied one of the party: "we do not need their friendship, and do not
ask it. But it were well if they understood a little more about the arts, which they affect
to patronize. When we played in the best style, there was none to mind us: it was all
sheer partiality. Any one they chose to favor, pleased; and they did not choose to favor
those that merited to please. It was intolerable to observe how often silliness and
mere stupidity attracted notice and applause."

"When I abate from this," said Wilhelm, "what seemed to spring from irony and
malice, I think we may nearly say, that one fares in art as he does in love. And, after all,
how shall a fashionable man of the world, with his dissipated habits, attain that
intimate presence with a special object, which an artist must long continue in, if he
would produce any thing approaching to perfection,—a state of feeling without which
it is impossible for any one to take such an interest, as the artist hopes and wishes, in
his work?
"Believe me, my friends, it is with talents as with virtue; one must love them for their
own sake, or entirely renounce them. And neither of them is acknowledged and
rewarded, except when their possessor can practise them unseen, like a dangerous
secret."
"Meanwhile, until some proper judge discovers us, we may all die of hunger," cried a
fellow in the corner.
"Not quite inevitably," answered Wilhelm. "I have observed, that, so long as one stirs
and lives, one always finds food and raiment, though they be not of the richest sort.
And why should we repine? Were we not, altogether unexpectedly, and when our
prospects were the very worst, taken kindly by the hand, and substantially
entertained? And now, when we are in want of nothing, does it once occur to us to
attempt any thing for our improvement, or to strive, though never so faintly, towards
advancement in our art? We are busied about indifferent matters; and, like schoolboys, we are casting all aside that might bring our lesson to our thoughts."
"In sad truth," said Philina, "it is even so! Let us choose a play: we will go through it on
the spot. Each of us must do his best, as if he stood before the largest audience."
They did not long deliberate: a play was fixed on. It was one of those which at that
time were meeting great applause in Germany, and have now passed away. Some of
the party whistled a symphony; each speedily bethought him of his part; they
commenced, and acted the entire play with the greatest attention, and really well
beyond expectation. Mutual applauses circulated: our friends had seldom been so
pleasantly diverted.
On finishing, they all felt exceedingly contented, partly on account of their time being
spent so well, partly because each of them experienced some degree of satisfaction

with his own performance. Wilhelm expressed himself copiously in their praise: the
conversation grew cheerful and merry.
"You would see," cried our friend, "what advances we should make, if we continued
this sort of training, and ceased to confine our attention to mere learning by heart,
rehearsing and playing mechanically, as if it were a barren duty, or some handicraft
employment. How different a character do our musical professors merit! What interest
they take in their art! how correct are they in the practisings they undertake in
common! What pains they are at in tuning their instruments; how exactly they observe
time; how delicately they express the strength and the weakness of their tones! No
one there thinks of gaining credit to himself by a loud accompaniment of the solo of
another. Each tries to play in the spirit of the composer, each to express well whatever
is committed to him, be it much or little.
"Should not we, too, go as strictly and as ingeniously to work, seeing we practise an art
far more delicate than that of music,—seeing we are called on to express the
commonest and the strangest emotions of human nature, with elegance, and so as to
delight? Can any thing be more shocking than to slur over our rehearsal, and in our
acting to depend on good luck, or the capricious choice of the moment? We ought to
place our highest happiness and satisfaction in mutually desiring to gain each other's
approbation: we should even value the applauses of the public only in so far as we
have previously sanctioned them among ourselves. Why is the master of the band
more secure about his music than the manager about his play? Because, in the
orchestra, each individual would feel ashamed of his mistakes, which offend the
outward ear; but how seldom have I found an actor disposed to acknowledge or feel
ashamed of mistakes, pardonable or the contrary, by which the inward ear is so
outrageously offended! I could wish, for my part, that our theatre were as narrow as
the wire of a rope-dancer, that so no inept fellow might dare to venture on it, instead
of being, as it is, a place where every one discovers in himself capacity enough to
flourish and parade."
The company gave this apostrophe a kind reception; each being convinced that the
censure conveyed in it could not apply to him, after acting a little while ago so
excellently with the rest. On the other hand, it was agreed, that during this journey,
and for the future if they remained together, they would regularly proceed with their
training in the manner just adopted. Only it was thought, that, as this was a thing of
good humor and free will, no formal manager must be allowed to have a hand in it.

Taking it for an established fact, that, among good men, the republican form of
government is the best, they declared that the post of manager should go round
among them: he must be chosen by universal suffrage, and every time have a sort of
little senate joined in authority along with him. So delighted did they feel with this
idea, that they longed to put it instantly in practice.
"I have no objection," said Melina, "if you incline making such an experiment while we
are travelling: I shall willingly suspend my own directorship until we reach some settled
place." He was in hopes of saving cash by this arrangement, and of casting many small
expenses on the shoulders of the little senate or of the interim manager. This fixed,
they went very earnestly to counsel how the form of the new commonwealth might
best be adjusted.
"'Tis an itinerating kingdom," said Laertes: "we shall at least have no quarrels about
frontiers."
They directly proceeded to the business, and elected Wilhelm as their first manager.
The senate also was appointed, the women having seat and vote in it: laws were
propounded, were rejected, were agreed to. In such playing, the time passed on
unnoticed; and, as our friends had spent it pleasantly, they also conceived that they
had really been effecting something useful, and, by their new constitution, had been
opening a new prospect for the stage of their native country.

CHAPTER III.
Seeing the company so favorably disposed, Wilhelm now hoped he might further have
it in his power to converse with them on the poetic merit of the plays which might
come before them. "It is not enough," said he next day, when they were all again
assembled, "for the actor merely to glance over a dramatic work, to judge of it by his
first impression, and thus, without investigation, to declare his satisfaction or
dissatisfaction with it. Such things may be allowed in a spectator, whose purpose it is
rather to be entertained and moved than formally to criticise. But the actor, on the
other hand, should be prepared to give a reason for his praise or censure; and how
shall he do this, if he have not taught himself to penetrate the sense, the views, and
feelings of his author? A common error is, to form a judgment of a drama from a single
part in it, and to look upon this part itself in an isolated point of view, not in its
connection with the whole. I have noticed this within a few days, so clearly in my own
conduct, that I will give you the account as an example, if you please to hear me
patiently.
"You all know Shakspeare's incomparable 'Hamlet:' our public reading of it at the castle
yielded every one of us the greatest satisfaction. On that occasion we proposed to act
the play; and I, not knowing what I undertook, engaged to play the prince's part. This I
conceived that I was studying, while I began to get by heart the strongest passages, the
soliloquies, and those scenes in which force of soul, vehemence and elevation of
feeling, have the freest scope; where the agitated heart is allowed to display itself with
touching expressiveness.
"I further conceived that I was penetrating quite into the spirit of the character, while I
endeavored, as it were, to take upon myself the load of deep melancholy under which
my prototype was laboring, and in this humor to pursue him through the strange
labyrinths of his caprices and his singularities. Thus learning, thus practising, I doubted
not but I should by and by become one person with my hero.
"But, the farther I advanced, the more difficult did it become for me to form any image
of the whole, in its general bearings; till at last it seemed as if impossible. I next went
through the entire piece, without interruption; but here, too, I found much that I could
not away with. At one time the characters, at another time the manner of
displaying them, seemed inconsistent; and I almost despaired of finding any general
tint, in which I might present my whole part with all its shadings and variations. In such

devious paths I toiled, and wandered long in vain; till at length a hope arose that I
might reach my aim in quite a new way.
"I set about investigating every trace of Hamlet's character, as it had shown itself
before his father's death: I endeavored to distinguish what in it was independent of
this mournful event, independent of the terrible events that followed; and what most
probably the young man would have been, had no such thing occurred.
"Soft, and from a noble stem, this royal flower had sprung up under the immediate
influences of majesty: the idea of moral rectitude with that of princely elevation, the
feeling of the good and dignified with the consciousness of high birth, had in him been
unfolded simultaneously. He was a prince, by birth a prince; and he wished to reign,
only that good men might be good without obstruction. Pleasing in form, polished by
nature, courteous from the heart, he was meant to be the pattern of youth and the joy
of the world.
"Without any prominent passion, his love for Ophelia was a still presentiment of sweet
wants. His zeal in knightly accomplishments was not entirely his own: it needed to be
quickened and inflamed by praise bestowed on others for excelling in them. Pure in
sentiment, he knew the honorable-minded, and could prize the rest which an upright
spirit tastes on the bosom of a friend. To a certain degree, he had learned to discern
and value the good and the beautiful in arts and sciences; the mean, the vulgar, was
offensive to him; and, if hatred could take root in his tender soul, it was only so far as
to make him properly despise the false and changeful insects of a court, and play with
them in easy scorn. He was calm in his temper, artless in his conduct, neither pleased
with idleness, nor too violently eager for employment. The routine of a university he
seemed to continue when at court. He possessed more mirth of humor than of heart:
he was a good companion, pliant, courteous, discreet, and able to forget and forgive
an injury, yet never able to unite himself with those who overstepped the limits of the
right, the good, and the becoming.
"When we read the piece again, you shall judge whether I am yet on the proper track. I
hope at least to bring forward passages that shall support my opinion in its main
points."
This delineation was received with warm approval; the company imagined they
foresaw that Hamlet's manner of proceeding might now be very satisfactorily
explained; they applauded this method of penetrating into the spirit of a writer. Each

of them proposed to himself to take up some piece, and study it on these principles,
and so unfold the author's meaning.

CHAPTER IV.
Our friends had to continue in the place for a day or two, and it was not long ere
sundry of them got engaged in adventures of a rather pleasant kind. Laertes in
particular was challenged by a lady of the neighborhood, a person of some property;
but he received her blandishments with extreme, nay, unhandsome, coldness, and had
in consequence to undergo a multitude of jibes from Philina. She took this opportunity
of detailing to our friend the hapless love-story which had made the youth so bitter a
foe to womankind. "Who can take it ill of him," she cried, "that he hates a sex which
has played him so foul, and given him to swallow, in one stoutly concentrated potion,
all the miseries that man can fear from woman? Do but conceive it: within four and
twenty hours, he was lover, bridegroom, husband, cuckold, patient, and widower! I
wot not how you could use a man worse."
Laertes hastened from the room half vexed, half laughing; and Philina in her
sprightliest style began to relate the story: how Laertes, a young man of eighteen, on
joining a company of actors, found in it a girl of fourteen on the point of departing with
her father, who had quarrelled with the manager. How, on the instant, he had fallen
mortally in love; had conjured the father by all possible considerations to remain,
promising at length to marry the young woman. How, after a few pleasing hours of
groomship, he had accordingly been wedded, and been happy as he ought;
whereupon, next day, while he was occupied at the rehearsal, his wife, according to
professional rule, had honored him with a pair of horns; and how as he, out of
excessive tenderness, hastening home far too soon, had, alas! found a former lover in
his place, he had struck into the affair with thoughtless indignation, had called out
both father and lover, and sustained a grievous wound in the duel. How father and
daughter had thereupon set off by night, leaving him behind to labor with a double
hurt. How the leech he applied to was unhappily the worst in nature, and the poor
fellow had got out of the adventure with blackened teeth and watering eyes. That he
was greatly to be pitied, being otherwise the bravest young man on the surface of the
earth. "Especially," said she, "it grieves me that the poor soul now hates women; for,
hating women, how can one keep living?"
Melina interrupted them with news, that, all things being now ready for the journey,
they would set out to-morrow morning. He handed them a plan, arranging how they
were to travel.

"If any good friend take me on his lap," said Philina, "I shall be content, though we sit
crammed together never so close and sorrily: 'tis all one to me."
"It does not signify," observed Laertes, who now entered.
"It is pitiful," said Wilhelm, hastening away. By the aid of money, he secured another
very comfortable coach; though Melina had pretended that there were no more. A
new distribution then took place; and our friends were rejoicing in the thought that
they should now travel pleasantly, when intelligence arrived that a party of military
volunteers had been seen upon the road, from whom little good could be expected.
In the town these tidings were received with great attention, though they were but
variable and ambiguous. As the contending armies were at that time placed, it seemed
impossible that any hostile corps could have advanced, or any friendly one hung arear, so far. Yet every man was eager to exhibit to our travellers the danger that
awaited them as truly dangerous: every man was eager to suggest that some other
route might be adopted.
By these means, most of our friends had been seized with anxiety and fear; and when,
according to the new republican constitution, the whole members of the state had
been called together to take counsel on this extraordinary case, they were almost
unanimously of opinion that it would be proper either to keep back the mischief by
abiding where they were, or to evade it by choosing another road.
Wilhelm alone, not participating in the panic, regarded it as mean to abandon, for the
sake of mere rumors, a plan they had not entered on without much thought. He
endeavored to put heart into them: his reasons were manly and convincing.
"It is but a rumor," he observed; "and how many such arise in time of war! Wellinformed people say that the occurrence is exceedingly improbable, nay, almost
impossible. Shall we, in so important a matter, allow a vague report to determine our
proceedings? The route pointed out to us by the count, and to which our passport was
adapted, is the shortest and in the best condition. It leads us to the town, where you
see acquaintances, friends, before you, and may hope for a good reception. The other
way will also bring us thither; but by what a circuit, and along what miserable roads!
Have we any right to hope, that, in this late season of the year, we shall get on at all?
and what time and money shall we squander in the mean while!" He added many
more considerations, presenting the matter on so many advantageous sides, that their

fear began to dissipate, and their courage to increase. He talked to them so much
about the discipline of regular troops, he painted the marauders and wandering rabble
so contemptuously, and represented the danger itself as so pleasant and inspiring, that
the spirits of the party were altogether cheered.
Laertes from the first had been of his opinion: he now declared that he would not
flinch or fail. Old Boisterous found a consenting phrase or two to utter, in his own vein;
Philina laughed at them all; and Madam Melina, who, notwithstanding her advanced
state of pregnancy, had lost nothing of her natural stout-heartedness, regarded the
proposal as heroic. Herr Melina, moved by this harmonious feeling, hoping also to save
somewhat by travelling the short road which had been first contemplated, did not
withstand the general consent; and the project was agreed to with universal alacrity.
They next began to make some preparations for defence at all hazards. They bought
large hangers, and slung them in well-quilted straps over their shoulders. Wilhelm
further stuck a pair of pistols in his girdle. Laertes, independently of this occurrence,
had a good gun. They all took the road in the highest glee.
On the second day of their journey, the drivers, who knew the country well, proposed
to take their noon's rest in a certain woody spot of the hills; since the town was far off,
and in good weather the hill-road was generally preferred.
The day being beautiful, all easily agreed to the proposal. Wilhelm, on foot, went on
before them through the hills; making every one that met him stare with astonishment
at his singular figure. He hastened with quick and contented steps across the forest;
Laertes walked whistling after him; none but the women continued to be dragged
along in the carriages. Mignon, too, ran forward by his side, proud of the hanger,
which, when the party were all arming, she would not go without. Around her hat she
had bound the pearl necklace, one of Mariana's relics, which Wilhelm still possessed.
Friedrich, the fair-haired boy, carried Laertes's gun. The harper had the most pacific
look; his long cloak was tucked up within his girdle, to let him walk more freely; he
leaned upon a knotty staff; his harp had been left behind him in the carriage.
Immediately on reaching the summit of the height, a task not without its difficulties,
our party recognized the appointed spot, by the fine beech-trees which encircled and
screened it. A spacious green, sloping softly in the middle of the forest, invited one to
tarry; a trimly bordered well offered the most grateful refreshment; and on the farther
side, through chasms in the mountains, and over the tops of the woods, appeared a

landscape distant, lovely, full of hope. Hamlets and mills were lying in the bottoms,
villages upon the plain: and a new chain of mountains, visible in the distance, made the
prospect still more significant of hope; for they entered only like a soft limitation.
The first comers took possession of the place, rested a while in the shade, lighted a
fire, and so awaited, singing as they worked, the remainder of the party, who by
degrees arrived, and with one accord saluted the place, the lovely weather, and still
lovelier scene.

CHAPTER V.
If our friends had frequently enjoyed a good and merry hour together while within four
walls, they were naturally much gayer here, where the freedom of the sky and the
beauty of the place seemed, as it were, to purify the feelings of every one. All felt
nearer to each other: all wished that they might pass their whole lives in so pleasant an
abode. They envied hunters, charcoal-men, and wood-cutters,—people whom their
calling constantly retains in such happy places,—but prized, above all, the delicious
economy of a band of gypsies. They envied these wonderful companions, entitled to
enjoy in blissful idleness all the adventurous charms of nature: they rejoiced at being in
some degree like them.
Meanwhile the women had begun to boil potatoes, and to unwrap and get ready the
victuals brought along with them. Some pots were standing by the fire. The party had
placed themselves in groups, under the trees and bushes. Their singular apparel, their
various weapons, gave them a foreign aspect. The horses were eating their provender
at a side. Could one have concealed the coaches, the look of this little horde would
have been romantic, even to complete illusion.
Wilhelm enjoyed a pleasure he had never felt before. He could now imagine his
present company to be a wandering colony, and himself the leader of it. In this
character he talked with those around him, and figured out the fantasy of the moment
as poetically as he could. The feelings of the party rose in cheerfulness: they ate and
drank and made merry, and repeatedly declared that they had never passed more
pleasant moments.
Their contentment had not long gone on increasing, till activity awoke among the
younger part of them. Wilhelm and Laertes seized their rapiers, and began to practise
on this occasion with theatrical intentions. They undertook to represent the duel in
which Hamlet and his adversary find so tragical an end. Both were persuaded, that, in
this powerful scene, it was not enough merely to keep pushing awkwardly hither and
thither, as it is generally exhibited in theatres: they were in hopes to show by example
how, in presenting it, a worthy spectacle might also be afforded to the critic in the art
of fencing. The rest made a circle round them. Both fought with skill and ardor. The
interest of the spectators rose higher every pass.

But all at once, in the nearest bush, a shot went off, and immediately another; and the
party flew asunder in terror. Next moment armed men were to be seen pressing
forward to the spot where the horses were eating their fodder, not far from the
coaches that were packed with luggage.
A universal scream proceeded from the women: our heroes threw away their rapiers,
seized their pistols, and ran towards the robbers; demanding, with violent threats, the
meaning of such conduct.
This question being answered laconically, with a couple of musket-shots, Wilhelm fired
his pistol at a crisp-headed knave, who had got upon the top of the coach, and was
cutting the cords of the package. Rightly hit, this artist instantly came tumbling down;
nor had Laertes missed. Both, encouraged by success, drew their side-arms; when a
number of the plundering party rushed out upon them, with curses and loud
bellowing, fired a few shots at them, and fronted their impetuosity with glittering
sabres. Our young heroes made a bold resistance. They called upon their other
comrades, and endeavored to excite them to a general resistance. But, erelong,
Wilhelm lost the sight of day, and the consciousness of what was passing. Stupefied by
a shot that wounded him between the breast and the left arm, by a stroke that split his
hat in two, and almost penetrated to his brain, he sank down, and only by the
narratives of others came afterwards to understand the luckless end of this adventure.
On again opening his eyes, he found himself in the strangest posture. The first thing
that pierced the dimness, which yet swam before his vision, was Philina's face bent
down over his. He felt weak, and, making a movement to rise, discovered that he was
in Philina's lap; into which, indeed, he again sank down. She was sitting on the sward.
She had softly pressed towards her the head of the fallen young man, and made for
him an easy couch, as far as in her power. Mignon was kneeling with dishevelled and
bloody hair at his feet, which she embraced with many tears.
On noticing his bloody clothes, Wilhelm asked, in a broken voice, where he was, and
what had happened to him and the rest. Philina begged him to be quiet: the others,
she said, were all in safety, and none but he and Laertes wounded. Further she would
tell him nothing, but earnestly entreated him to keep still, as his wounds had been but
slightly and hastily bound. He stretched out his hand to Mignon, and inquired about
the bloody locks of the child, who he supposed was also wounded.

For the sake of quietness, Philina let him know that this true-hearted creature, seeing
her friend wounded, and in the hurry of the instant being able to think of nothing
which would stanch the blood, had taken her own hair, that was flowing round her
head, and tried to stop the wounds with it, but had soon been obliged to give up the
vain attempt; that afterwards they had bound him with moss and dry mushrooms,
Philina giving up her neckerchief for that purpose.
Wilhelm noticed that Philina was sitting with her back against her own trunk, which
still looked firmly locked and quite uninjured. He inquired if the rest also had been so
lucky as to save their goods. She answered with a shrug of the shoulders, and a look
over the green, where broken chests, and coffers beaten into fragments, and
knapsacks ripped up, and a multitude of little wares, lay scattered all round. No person
was to be seen in the place, this strange group thus being alone in the solitude.
Inquiring further, our friend learned more and more particulars. The rest of the men, it
appeared, who, at all events, might still have made resistance, were struck with terror,
and soon overpowered. Some fled, some looked with horror at the accident. The
drivers, for the sake of their cattle, had held out more obstinately; but they, too, were
at last thrown down and tied; after which, in a few minutes, every thing was
thoroughly ransacked, and the booty carried off. The hapless travellers, their fear of
death being over, had begun to mourn their loss; had hastened with the greatest
speed to the neighboring village, taking with them Laertes, whose wounds were slight,
and carrying off but a very few fragments of their property. The harper, having placed
his damaged instrument against a tree, had proceeded in their company to the place,
to seek a surgeon, and return with his utmost rapidity to help his benefactor, whom he
had left apparently upon the brink of death.

CHAPTER VI.
Meanwhile our three adventurers continued yet a space in their strange position, no
one returning to their aid. Evening was advancing: the darkness threatened to come
on. Philina's indifference was changing to anxiety; Mignon ran to and fro, her
impatience increasing every moment; and at last, when their prayer was granted, and
human creatures did approach, a new alarm fell upon them. They distinctly heard a
troop of horses coming up the road they had lately travelled: they dreaded lest a
second time some company of unbidden guests might be purposing to visit this scene
of battle, and gather up the gleanings.
The more agreeable was their surprise, when, after a few moments, a lady issued from
the thickets, riding on a gray courser, and accompanied by an elderly gentleman and
some cavaliers, followed by grooms, servants, and a troop of hussars.
Philina started at this phenomenon, and was about to call, and entreat the fair Amazon
for help, when the latter turned her astonished eyes on the group, instantly checked
her horse, rode up to them, and halted. She inquired eagerly about the wounded man,
whose posture in the lap of this light-minded Samaritan seemed to strike her as
peculiarly strange.
"Is he your husband?" she inquired of Philina. "Only a friend," replied the other, with a
tone Wilhelm liked not at all. He had fixed his eyes upon the soft, elevated, calm,
sympathizing features of the stranger: he thought he had never seen aught nobler or
more lovely. Her shape he could not see: it was hid by a man's white great-coat, which
she seemed to have borrowed from some of her attendants, to screen her from the
chill evening air.
By this the horsemen also had come near. Some of them dismounted: the lady did so
likewise. She asked, with humane sympathy, concerning every circumstance of the
mishap which had befallen the travellers, but especially concerning the wounds of the
poor youth who lay before her. Thereupon she turned quickly round, and went aside
with the old gentleman to some carriages, which were slowly coming up the hill, and
which at length stopped upon the scene of action.
The young lady having stood with her conductor a short time at the door of one of the
coaches, and talked with the people in it, a man of a squat figure stepped out, and
came along with them to our wounded hero. By the little box which he held in his

hand, and the leathern pouch with instruments in it, you soon recognized him for a
surgeon. His manners were rude rather than attractive; but his hand was light, and his
help welcome.
Having examined strictly, he declared that none of the wounds were dangerous. He
would dress them, he said, on the spot; after which the patient might be carried to the
nearest village.
The young lady's anxiety seemed to augment. "Do but look," she said, after going to
and fro once or twice, and again bringing the old gentleman to the place: "look how
they have treated him! And is it not on our account that he is suffering?" Wilhelm
heard these words, but did not understand them. She went restlessly up and down: it
seemed as if she could not tear herself away from the presence of the wounded man;
while at the same time she feared to violate decorum by remaining, when they had
begun, though not without difficulty, to remove some part of his apparel. The surgeon
was just cutting off the left sleeve of his patient's coat, when the old gentleman came
near, and represented to the lady, in a serious tone, the necessity of proceeding on
their journey. Wilhelm kept his eyes bent on her, and was so enchanted with her looks,
that he scarcely felt what he was suffering or doing.
Philina, in the mean time, had risen to kiss the lady's hand. While they stood beside
each other, Wilhelm thought he had never seen such a contrast. Philina had never till
now appeared in so unfavorable a light. She had no right, as it seemed to him, to come
near that noble creature, still less to touch her.
The lady asked Philina various things, but in an under-tone. At length she turned to the
old gentleman, and said, "Dear uncle, may I be generous at your expense?" She took
off the great-coat, with the visible intention to give it to the stripped and wounded
youth.
Wilhelm, whom the healing look of her eyes had hitherto held fixed, was now, as the
surtout fell away, astonished at her lovely figure. She came near, and softly laid the
coat above him. At this moment, as he tried to open his mouth and stammer out some
words of gratitude, the lively impression of her presence worked so strongly on his
senses, already caught and bewildered, that all at once it appeared to him as if her
head were encircled with rays; and a glancing light seemed by degrees to spread itself
over all her form. At this moment the surgeon, making preparations to extract the ball
from his wound, gave him a sharper twinge; the angel faded away from the eyes of the

fainting patient; he lost all consciousness; and, on returning to himself, the
horsemen and coaches, the fair one with her attendants, had vanished like a dream.

CHAPTER VII.
Wilhelm's wounds once dressed, and his clothes put on, the surgeon hastened off, just
as the harper with a number of peasants arrived. Out of some cut boughs, which they
speedily wattled with twigs, a kind of litter was constructed, upon which they placed
the wounded youth, and under the conduct of a mounted huntsman, whom the noble
company had left behind them, carried him softly down the mountain. The harper,
silent, and shrouded in his own thoughts, bore with him his broken instrument. Some
men brought on Philina's box, herself following with a bundle. Mignon skipped along
through copse and thicket, now before the party, now beside them, and looked up
with longing eyes at her hurt protector.
He, meanwhile, wrapped in his warm surtout, was lying peacefully upon the litter. An
electric warmth seemed to flow from the fine wool into his body: in short, he felt in
the most delightful frame of mind. The lovely being, whom this garment lately
covered, had affected him to the very heart. He still saw the coat falling down from her
shoulders; saw that noble form, begirt with radiance, stand beside him; and his soul
hied over rocks and forests on the footsteps of his vanished benefactress.
It was nightfall when the party reached the village, and halted at the door of the inn
where the rest of the company, in the gloom of despondency, were bewailing their
irreparable loss. The one little chamber of the house was crammed with people. Some
of them were lying upon straw, some were occupying benches, some had squeezed
themselves behind the stove. Frau Melina, in a neighboring room, was painfully
expecting her delivery. Fright had accelerated this event. With the sole assistance of
the landlady, a young, inexperienced woman, nothing good could be expected.
As the party just arrived required admission, there arose a universal murmur. All now
maintained, that by Wilhelm's advice alone, and under his especial guidance, they had
entered on this dangerous road, and exposed themselves to such misfortunes. They
threw the blame of the disaster wholly on him: they stuck themselves in the door, to
oppose his entrance; declaring that he must go elsewhere and seek quarters. Philina
they received with still greater indignation, nor did Mignon and the harper escape
their share.
The huntsman, to whom the care of the forsaken party had been earnestly and strictly
recommended by his beautiful mistress, soon grew tired of this discussion: he rushed
upon the company with oaths and menaces; commanding them to fall to the right and

left, and make way for this new arrival. They now began to pacify themselves. He made
a place for Wilhelm on a table, which he shoved into a corner: Philina had her box put
there, and then sat down upon it. All packed themselves as they best could, and the
huntsman went away to see if he could not find for "the young couple" a more
convenient lodging.
Scarcely was he gone, when spite again grew noisy, and one reproach began to follow
close upon another. Each described and magnified his loss, censuring the foolhardiness
they had so keenly smarted for. They did not even hide the malicious satisfaction they
felt at Wilhelm's wounds: they jeered Philina, and imputed to her as a crime the means
by which she had saved her trunk. From a multitude of jibes and bitter innuendoes,
you were required to conclude, that, during the plundering and discomfiture, she had
endeavored to work herself into favor with the captain of the band, and had
persuaded him, Heaven knew by what arts and complaisance, to give her back the
chest unhurt. To all this she answered nothing, only clanked with the large padlocks of
her box, to impress her censurers completely with its presence, and by her own good
fortune to augment their desperation.

CHAPTER VIII.
Though our friend was weak from loss of blood, and though, ever since the appearance
of that helpful angel, his feelings had been soft and mild, yet at last he could not help
getting vexed at the harsh and unjust speeches which, as he continued silent, the
discontented company went on uttering against him. Feeling himself strong enough to
sit up, and expostulate on the annoyance they were causing to their friend and leader,
he raised his bandaged head, and propping himself with some difficulty, and leaning
against the wall, he began to speak as follows:—
"Considering the pain your losses occasion, I forgive you for assailing me with injuries
at a moment when you should condole with me; for opposing and casting me from you
the first time I have needed to look to you for help. The services I did you, the
complaisance I showed you, I regarded as sufficiently repaid by your thanks, by your
friendly conduct: do not warp my thoughts, do not force my heart to go back and
calculate what I have done for you; the calculation would be painful to me. Chance
brought me near you, circumstances and a secret inclination kept me with you. I
participated in your labors and your pleasures: my slender abilities were ever at your
service. If you now blame me with bitterness for the mishap that has befallen us, you
do not recollect that the first project of taking this road came to us from stranger
people, was weighed by all of you, and sanctioned by every one as well as by me.
"Had our journey ended happily, each would have taken credit to himself for the
happy thought of suggesting this plan, and preferring it to others; each would joyfully
have put us in mind of our deliberations, and of the vote he gave: but now you make
me alone responsible; you force a piece of blame upon me, which I would willingly
submit to, if my conscience, with a clear voice, did not pronounce me innocent, nay, if I
might not appeal with safety even to yourselves. If you have aught to say against me,
bring it forward in order, and I shall defend myself; if you have nothing reasonable to
allege, then be silent, and do not torment me now, when I have such pressing need of
rest."
By way of answer, the girls once more began whimpering and whining, and describing
their losses circumstantially. Melina was quite beside himself; for he had suffered
more in purse than any of them,—more, indeed, than we can rightly estimate. He
stamped like a madman up and down the little room, he knocked his head against the
wall, he swore and scolded in the most unseemly manner; and the landlady entering at
this very time with news that his wife had been delivered of a dead child, he yielded to

the most furious ebullitions; while, in accordance with him, all howled and shrieked,
and bellowed and uproared, with double vigor.
Wilhelm, touched to the heart at the same time with sympathy for their sorrows and
with vexation at their mean way of thinking, felt all the vigor of his soul awakened,
notwithstanding the weakness of his body. "Deplorable as your case may be,"
exclaimed he, "I shall almost be compelled to despise you! No misfortune gives us right
to load an innocent man with reproaches. If I had share in this false step, am not I
suffering my share? I lie wounded here; and, if the company has come to loss, I myself
have come to most. The wardrobe of which we have been robbed, the decorations
that are gone, were mine; for you, Herr Melina, have not yet paid me; and I here fully
acquit you of all obligation in that matter."
"It is well to give what none of us will ever see again," replied Melina. "Your money
was lying in my wife's coffer, and it is your own blame that you have lost it. But, ah! if
that were all!" And thereupon he began anew to stamp and scold and squeal. Every
one recalled to memory the superb clothes from the count's wardrobe; the buckles,
watches, snuff-boxes, hats, for which Melina had so happily transacted with the head
valet. Each, then, thought also of his own, though far inferior, treasures. They looked
with spleen at Philina's box, and gave Wilhelm to understand that he had indeed done
wisely to connect himself with that fair personage, and to save his own goods also,
under the shadow of her fortune.
"Do you think," he exclaimed at last, "that I shall keep any thing apart while you are
starving? And is this the first time I have honestly shared with you in a season of need?
Open the trunk: all that is mine shall go to supply the common wants."
"It is my trunk," observed Philina, "and I will not open it till I please. Your rag or two of
clothes, which I have saved for you, could amount to little, though they were sold to
the most conscientious of Jews. Think of yourself,—what your cure will cost, what may
befall you in a strange country."
"You, Philina," answered Wilhelm, "will keep back from me nothing that is mine; and
that little will help us out of the first perplexity. But a man possesses many things
besides coined money to assist his friends with. All that is in me shall be devoted to
these hapless persons, who, doubtless, on returning to their senses, will repent their
present conduct. Yes," continued he, "I feel that you have need of help; and, what is
mine to do, I will perform. Give me your confidence again; compose yourselves for a

moment, and accept of what I promise. Who will receive the engagement of me in the
name of all?"
Here he stretched out his hand, and cried, "I promise not to flinch from you, never to
forsake you till each shall see his losses doubly and trebly repaired; till the situation
you are fallen into, by whose blame soever, shall be totally forgotten by all of you, and
changed with a better."
He kept his hand still stretched out, but no one would take hold of it. "I promise it
again," cried he, sinking back upon his pillow. All continued silent: they felt ashamed,
but nothing comforted: and Philina, sitting on her chest, kept cracking nuts, a stock of
which she had discovered in her pocket.

CHAPTER IX.
The huntsman now came back with several people, and made preparations for carrying
away the wounded youth. He had persuaded the parson of the place to receive the
"young couple" into his house; Philina's trunk was taken out; she followed with a
natural air of dignity. Mignon ran before; and, when the patient reached the
parsonage, a wide couch, which had long been standing ready as guest's bed and bed
of honor, was assigned him. Here it was first discovered that his wound had opened,
and bled profusely. A new bandage was required for it. He fell into a feverish state:
Philina waited on him faithfully; and, when fatigue overpowered her, she was relieved
by the harper. Mignon, with the firmest purpose to watch, had fallen asleep in a
corner.
Next morning Wilhelm, who felt himself in some degree refreshed, learned, by
inquiring of the huntsman, that the honorable persons who last night assisted him so
nobly, had shortly before left their estates, in order to avoid the movements of the
contending armies, and remain, till the time of peace, in some more quiet district. He
named the elderly nobleman, as well as his niece, mentioned the place they were first
going to, and told how the young lady had charged him to take care of Wilhelm.
The entrance of the surgeon interrupted the warm expressions of gratitude our friend
was giving vent to. He made a circumstantial description of the wounds, and certified
that they would soon heal, if the patient took care of them, and kept himself at peace.
When the huntsman was gone, Philina signified that he had left with her a purse of
twenty louis-d'or; that he had given the parson a remuneration for their lodging, and
left with him money to defray the surgeon's bill when the cure should be completed.
She added, that she herself passed everywhere for Wilhelm's wife; that she now
begged leave to introduce herself once for all to him in this capacity, and would not
allow him to look out for any other sick-nurse.
"Philina," said Wilhelm, "in this disaster that has overtaken us, I am already deeply in
your debt, for kindness shown me; and I should not wish to see my obligations
increased. I am uneasy so long as you are about me, for I know of nothing by which I
can repay your labor. Give me what things of mine you have saved in your trunk; join
the rest of the company; seek another lodging; take my thanks, and the gold watch as
a small acknowledgment: only leave me; your presence disturbs me more than you can
fancy."

She laughed in his face when he had ended. "Thou art a fool," she said: "thou wilt not
gather wisdom. I know better what is good for thee: I will stay, I will not budge from
the spot. I have never counted on the gratitude of men, and therefore not on thine;
and, if I have a touch of kindness for thee, what hast thou to do with it?"
She staid accordingly, and soon wormed herself into favor with the parson and his
household; being always cheerful, having the knack of giving little presents, and of
talking to each in his own vein; at the same time always contriving to do exactly what
she pleased. Wilhelm's state was not uncomfortable: the surgeon, an ignorant but not
unskilful man, let nature have sway; and the patient was soon on the road to recovery.
For such a consummation he vehemently longed, being eager to pursue his plans and
wishes.
Incessantly he kept recalling that event, which had made an ineffaceable impression
on his heart. He saw the beautiful Amazon again come riding out of the thickets: she
approached him, dismounted, went to and fro, and strove to serve him. He saw the
garment she was wrapped in fall down from her shoulders: he saw her countenance,
her figure, vanish in their radiance. All the dreams of his youth now fastened on this
image. Here he conceived he had at length beheld the noble, the heroic, Clorinda with
his own eyes; and again he bethought him of that royal youth, to whose sick-bed the
lovely, sympathizing princess came in her modest meekness.
"May it not be," said he often to himself in secret, "that, in youth as in sleep, the
images of coming things hover round us, and mysteriously become visible to our
unobstructed eyes? May not the seeds of what is to betide us be already scattered by
the hand of Fate? may not a foretaste of the fruits we yet hope to gather possibly be
given us?"
His sick-bed gave him leisure to repeat those scenes in every mood. A thousand times
he called back the tone of that sweet voice: a thousand times he envied Philina, who
had kissed that helpful hand. Often the whole incident appeared before him as a
dream; and he would have reckoned it a fiction, if the white surtout had not been left
behind to convince him that the vision had a real existence.
With the greatest care for this piece of apparel, he combined the most ardent wish to
wear it. The first time he arose, he put it on, and was kept in fear all day lest it might
be hurt by some stain or other injury.

CHAPTER X.
Laertes visited his friend. He had not been present during that lively scene at the inn,
being then confined to bed in an upper chamber. For his loss he was already in a great
degree consoled: he helped himself with his customary, "What does it signify?" He
detailed various laughable particulars about the company; particularly charging Frau
Melina with lamenting the loss of her stillborn daughter, solely because she herself
could not on that account enjoy the Old-German satisfaction of having a Mechthilde
christened. As for her husband, it now appeared that he had been possessed of
abundant cash, and even at first had by no means needed the advances which he had
cajoled from Wilhelm. Melina's present plan was, to set off by the next post-wagon,
and he meant to require of Wilhelm an introductory letter to his friend, Manager Serlo,
in whose company, the present undertaking having gone to wreck, he now wished to
establish himself.
For some days Mignon had been singularly quiet: when pressed with questions, she at
length admitted that her right arm was out of joint. "Thou hast thy own folly to thank
for that," observed Philina, and then told how the child had drawn her sword in the
battle, and, seeing her friend in peril, had struck fiercely at the freebooters, one of
whom had at length seized her by the arm, and pitched her to a side. They chid her for
not sooner speaking of her ailment; but they easily saw that she was apprehensive of
the surgeon, who had hitherto looked on her as a boy. With a view to remove the
mischief, she was made to keep her arm in a sling, which arrangement, too, displeased
her; for now she was obliged to surrender most part of her share in the management
and nursing of our friend to Philina. That pleasing sinner but showed herself the more
active and attentive on this account.
One morning, on awakening, Wilhelm found himself strangely near to her. In the
movements of sleep, he had hitched himself quite to the back of the spacious bed.
Philina was lying across from the front part of it: she seemed to have fallen asleep on
the bed while sitting there and reading. A book had dropped from her hand: she had
sunk back; and her head was lying near his breast, over which her fair and now
loosened hair was spread in streams. The disorder of sleep enlivened her charms more
than art or purpose could have done: a childlike smiling rest hovered on her
countenance. He looked at her for a time, and seemed to blame himself for the
pleasure this gave him. He had viewed her attentively for some moments, when she
began to awake. He softly closed his eyes, but could not help glimmering at her

through his eyelashes, as she trimmed herself again, and went away to see about
breakfast.
All the actors had at length successively announced themselves to Wilhelm; asking
introductory letters, requiring money for their journey with more or less impatience
and ill-breeding, and constantly receiving it, against Philina's will. It was in vain for her
to tell our friend that the huntsman had already left a handsome sum with these
people, and that accordingly they did but cozen him. To these remonstrances he gave
no heed: on the contrary, the two had a sharp quarrel about it; which ended by
Wilhelm signifying, once for all, that Philina must now join the rest of the company,
and seek her fortune with Serlo.
For an instant or two she lost temper; but, speedily recovering her composure, she
cried, "If I had but my fair-haired boy again, I should not care a fig for any of you." She
meant Friedrich, who had vanished from the scene of battle, and never since
appeared.
Next morning Mignon brought news to the bedside, that Philina had gone off by night;
leaving all that belonged to Wilhelm very neatly laid out in the next room. He felt her
absence; he had lost in her a faithful nurse, a cheerful companion; he was no longer
used to be alone. But Mignon soon filled up the blank.
Ever since that light-minded beauty had been near the patient with her friendly cares,
the little creature had by degrees drawn back, and remained silent and secluded in
herself; but, the field being clear once more, she again came forth with her attentions
and her love, again was eager in serving, and lively in entertaining, him.

CHAPTER XI.
Wilhelm was rapidly approaching complete recovery: he now hoped to be upon his
journey in a few days. He proposed no more to lead an aimless routine of existence:
the steps of his career were henceforth to be calculated for an end. In the first place,
he purposed to seek out that beneficent lady, and express the gratitude he felt to her;
then to proceed without delay to his friend the manager, that he might do his utmost
to assist the luckless company; intending, at the same time, to visit the commercial
friends whom he had letters for, and to transact the business which had been intrusted
to him. He was not without hope that fortune, as formerly, would favor him, and give
him opportunity, by some lucky speculation, to repair his losses, and fill up the vacuity
of his coffer.
The desire of again beholding his beautiful deliverer augmented every day. To settle
his route, he took counsel with the clergyman,—a person well skilled in statistics and
geography, and possessing a fine collection of charts and books. They two searched for
the place which this noble family had chosen as their residence while the war
continued: they searched for information respecting the family itself. But their place
was to be found in no geography or map, and the heraldic manuals made no mention
of their name.
Wilhelm grew uneasy; and, having mentioned the cause of his anxiety, the harper told
him he had reason to believe that the huntsman, from whatever motive, had
concealed the real designations.
Conceiving himself now to be in the immediate neighborhood of his lovely
benefactress, Wilhelm hoped he might obtain some tidings of her if he sent out the
harper; but in this, too, he was deceived. Diligently as the old man kept inquiring, he
could find no trace of her. Of late days a number of quick movements and unforeseen
marches had taken place in that quarter; no one had particularly noticed the travelling
party; and the ancient messenger, to avoid being taken for a Jewish spy, was obliged to
return, and appear without any olive-leaf before his master and friend. He gave a strict
account of his conduct in this commission, striving to keep far from him all suspicions
of remissness. He endeavored by every means to mitigate the trouble of our friend;
bethought him of every thing that he had learned from the huntsman, and advanced a
number of conjectures; out of all which, one circumstance at length came to light,
whereby Wilhelm could explain some enigmatic words of his vanished benefactress.

The freebooters, it appeared, had lain in wait, not for the wandering troop, but for that
noble company, whom they rightly guessed to be provided with store of gold and
valuables, and of whose movements they must have had precise intelligence. Whether
the attack should be imputed to some free corps, to marauders, or to robbers, was
uncertain. It was clear, however, that, by good fortune for the high and rich company,
the poor and low had first arrived upon the place, and undergone the fate which was
provided for the others. It was to this that the lady's words referred, which Wilhelm
yet well recollected. If he might now be happy and contented, that a prescient Genius
had selected him for the sacrifice, which saved a perfect mortal, he was, on the other
hand, nigh desperate, when he thought that all hope of finding her and seeing her
again was, at least for the present, completely gone.
What increased this singular emotion still further, was the likeness which he thought
he had observed between the countess and the beautiful unknown. They resembled
one another as two sisters may, of whom neither can be called the younger or the
elder, for they seem to be twins.
The recollection of the amiable countess was to Wilhelm infinitely sweet. He recalled
her image but too willingly into his memory. But anon the figure of the noble Amazon
would step between: one vision melted and changed into the other, and the form of
neither would abide with him.
A new resemblance—the similarity of their handwritings—naturally struck him with
still greater wonder. He had a charming song in the countess's hand laid up in his
portfolio; and in the surtout he had found a little note, inquiring with much tender
care about the health of an uncle.
Wilhelm was convinced that his benefactress must have penned this billet; that it must
have been sent from one chamber to another, at some inn during their journey, and
put into the coat-pocket by the uncle. He held both papers together; and, if the regular
and graceful letters of the countess had already pleased him much, he found in the
similar but freer lines of the stranger a flowing harmony which could not be described.
The note contained nothing; yet the strokes of it seemed to affect him, as the presence
of their fancied writer once had done.
He fell into a dreamy longing; and well accordant with his feelings was the song which
at that instant Mignon and the harper began to sing, with a touching expression, in the
form of an irregular duet.

CHAPTER XII.
The soft allurements of his dear presiding angel, far from leading our friend to any one
determined path, did but nourish and increase the unrest he had previously
experienced. A secret fire was gliding through his veins: objects distinct and indistinct
alternated within his soul, and awoke unspeakable desire. At one time he wished for a
horse, at another for wings; and not till it seemed impossible that he could stay, did he
look round him to discover whither he was wanting to go.
The threads of his destiny had become so strangely entangled, he wished to see its
curious knots unravelled, or cut in two. Often when he heard the tramp of a horse, or
the rolling of a carriage, he would run to the window, and look out, in hopes it might
be some one seeking him,—some one, even though it were by chance, bringing him
intelligence and certainty and joy. He told stories to himself, how his friend Werner
might visit these parts, and come upon him; how, perhaps, Mariana might appear. The
sound of every post's horn threw him into agitation. It would be Melina sending news
to him of his adventures: above all, it would be the huntsman coming back to carry him
to the beauty he worshipped.
Of all these possibilities, unhappily no one occurred: he was forced at last to return to
the company of himself; and, in again looking through the past, there was one
circumstance which, the more he viewed and weighed it, grew the more offensive and
intolerable to him. It was his unprosperous generalship, of which he never thought
without vexation. For although, on the evening of that luckless day, he had produced a
pretty fair defence of his conduct when accused by the company, yet he could not hide
from himself that he was guilty. On the contrary, in hypochondriac moments, he took
the blame of the whole misfortune.
Self-love exaggerates our faults as well as our virtues. Wilhelm though the had
awakened confidence in himself, had guided the will of the rest; that, led by
inexperience and rashness, they had ventured on, till a danger seized them, for which
they were no match. Loud as well as silent reproaches had then assailed him; and if, in
their sorrowful condition, he had promised the company, misguided by him, never to
forsake them till their loss had been repaid with usury, this was but another folly for
which he had to blame himself,—the folly of presuming to take upon his single
shoulders a misfortune that was spread over many. One instant he accused himself of
uttering this promise, under the excitement and the pressure of the moment; the next,
he again felt that this generous presentation of his hand, which no one deigned to

accept, was but a light formality compared with the vow his heart had taken. He
meditated means of being kind and useful to them: he found every cause conspire to
quicken his visit to Serlo. Accordingly he packed his things together; and without
waiting his complete recovery, without listening to the counsel of the parson or of the
surgeon, he hastened, in the strange society of Mignon and the harper, to escape the
inactivity in which his fate had once more too long detained him.

CHAPTER XIII.
Serlo received him with open arms, crying as he met him, "Is it you? Do I see you
again? You have scarcely changed at all. Is your love for that noblest of arts still as
lively and strong? So glad am I at your arrival, that I even feel no longer the mistrust
your last letters had excited in me."
Wilhelm asked with surprise for a clearer explanation.
"You have treated me," said Serlo, "not like an old friend, but as if I were a great lord,
to whom with a safe conscience you might recommend useless people. Our destiny
depends on the opinion of the public; and I fear Herr Melina and his suite can hardly
be received among us."
Wilhelm tried to say something in their favor; but Serlo began to draw so merciless a
picture of them, that our friend was happy when a lady came into the room, and put a
stop to the discussion. She was introduced to him as Aurelia, the sister of his friend;
she received him with extreme kindness; and her conversation was so pleasing, that he
did not even remark a shade of sorrow visible on her expressive countenance, to which
it lent peculiar interest.
For the first time during many months, Wilhelm felt once more in his proper element.
Of late in talking, he had merely found submissive listeners, and even these not
always; but now he had the happiness to speak with critics and artists, who not only
fully understood him, but repaid his observations by others equally instructive. With
wonderful vivacity they travelled through the latest plays, with wonderful correctness
judged them. The decisions of the public they could try and estimate: they speedily
threw light on each other's thoughts.
Loving Shakspeare as our friend did, he failed not to lead round the conversation to
the merits of that dramatist. Expressing, as he entertained, the liveliest hopes of the
new epoch which these exquisite productions must form in Germany, he erelong
introduced his "Hamlet," which play had busied him so much of late.
Serlo declared that he would long ago have represented the play, had it at all been
possible, and that he himself would willingly engage to act Polonius. He added, with a
smile, "An Ophelia, too, will certainly turn up, if we had but a Prince."

Wilhelm did not notice that Aurelia seemed a little hurt at her brother's sarcasm. Our
friend was in his proper vein, becoming copious and didactic, expounding how he
would have "Hamlet" played. He circumstantially delivered to his hearers the opinions
we before saw him busied with; taking all the trouble possible to make his notion of
the matter acceptable, sceptical as Serlo showed himself regarding it. "Well, then,"
said the latter finally, "suppose we grant you all this, what will you explain by it?"
"Much, every thing," said Wilhelm. "Conceive a prince such as I have painted him, and
that his father suddenly dies. Ambition and the love of rule are not the passions that
inspire him. As a king's son, he would have been contented; but now he is first
constrained to consider the difference which separates a sovereign from a subject. The
crown was not hereditary; yet his father's longer possession of it would have
strengthened the pretensions of an only son, and secured his hopes of succession. In
place of this, he now beholds himself excluded by his uncle, in spite of specious
promises, most probably forever. He is now poor in goods and favor, and a stranger in
the scene which from youth he had looked upon as his inheritance. His temper here
assumes its first mournful tinge. He feels that now he is not more, that he is less, than
a private nobleman; he offers himself as the servant of every one; he is not courteous
and condescending, he is needy and degraded.
"His past condition he remembers as a vanished dream. It is in vain that his uncle
strives to cheer him, to present his situation in another point of view. The feeling of his
nothingness will not leave him.
"The second stroke that came upon him wounded deeper, bowed still more. It was the
marriage of his mother. The faithful, tender son had yet a mother, when his father
passed away. He hoped, in the company of his surviving noble-minded parent, to
reverence the heroic form of the departed: but his mother, too, he loses; and it is
something worse than death that robs him of her. The trustful image, which a good
child loves to form of its parents, is gone. With the dead there is no help, on the living
no hold. Moreover, she is a woman; and her name is Frailty, like that of all her sex.
"Now only does he feel completely bowed down, now only orphaned; and no
happiness of life can repay what he has lost. Not reflective or sorrowful by nature,
reflection and sorrow have become for him a heavy obligation. It is thus that we see
him first enter on the scene. I do not think that I have mixed aught foreign with the
play, or overcharged a single feature of it."

Serlo looked at his sister, and said, "Did I give thee a false picture of our friend? He
begins well: he has still many things to tell us, many to persuade us of." Wilhelm
asseverated loudly, that he meant not to persuade, but to convince: he begged for
another moment's patience.
"Figure to yourselves this youth," cried he, "this son of princes; conceive him vividly,
bring his state before your eyes, and then observe him when he learns that his father's
spirit walks; stand by him in the terrors of the night, when even the venerable ghost
appears before him. He is seized with boundless horror; he speaks to the mysterious
form; he sees it beckon him; he follows and hears. The fearful accusation of his uncle
rings in his ears, the summons to revenge, and the piercing, oft-repeated prayer,
Remember me!
"And, when the ghost has vanished, who is it that stands before us? A young hero
panting for vengeance? A prince by birth, rejoicing to be called to punish the usurper
of his crown? No! trouble and astonishment take hold of the solitary young man: he
grows bitter against smiling villains, swears that he will not forget the spirit, and
concludes with the significant ejaculation,—
"'The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,That ever I was born to set it right!'
"In these words, I imagine, will be found the key to Hamlet's whole procedure. To me it
is clear that Shakspeare meant, in the present case, to represent the effects of a great
action laid upon a soul unfit for the performance of it. In this view the whole play
seems to me to be composed. There is an oak-tree planted in a costly jar, which should
have borne only pleasant flowers in its bosom: the roots expand, the jar is shivered.
"A lovely, pure, noble, and most moral nature, without the strength of nerve which
forms a hero, sinks beneath a burden it cannot bear and must not cast away. All duties
are holy for him: the present is too hard. Impossibilities have been required of him,—
not in themselves impossibilities, but such for him. He winds and turns, and torments
himself; he advances and recoils; is ever put in mind, ever puts himself in mind; at last
does all but lose his purpose from his thoughts, yet still without recovering his peace of
mind."

CHAPTER XIV.
Several people entering interrupted the discussion. They were musical dilettanti, who
commonly assembled at Serlo's once a week, and formed a little concert. Serlo himself
loved music much: he used to maintain, that a player without taste for it never could
attain a distinct conception and feeling of the scenic art. "As a man performs," he
would observe, "with far more ease and dignity when his gestures are accompanied
and guided by a tune; so the player ought, in idea as it were, to set to music even his
prose parts, that he may not monotonously slight them over in his individual style, but
treat them in suitable alternation by time and measure."
Aurelia seemed to give but little heed to what was passing: at last she conducted
Wilhelm to another room; and going to the window, and looking out at the starry sky,
she said to him, "You have more to tell us about Hamlet: I will not hurry you,—my
brother must hear it as well as I; but let me beg to know your thoughts about Ophelia."
"Of her there cannot much be said," he answered; "for a few master-strokes complete
her character. The whole being of Ophelia floats in sweet and ripe sensation. Kindness
for the prince, to whose hand she may aspire, flows so spontaneously, her tender
heart obeys its impulses so unresistingly, that both father and brother are afraid: both
give her warning harshly and directly. Decorum, like the thin lawn upon her bosom,
cannot hide the soft, still movements of her heart: it, on the contrary, betrays them.
Her fancy is smit; her silent modesty breathes amiable desire; and, if the friendly
goddess Opportunity should shake the tree, its fruit would fall."
"And then," said Aurelia, "when she beholds herself forsaken, cast away, despised;
when all is inverted in the soul of her crazed lover, and the highest changes to the
lowest, and, instead of the sweet cup of love, he offers her the bitter cup of woe"—
"Her heart breaks," cried Wilhelm; "the whole structure of her being is loosened from
its joinings; her father's death strikes fiercely against it, and the fair edifice altogether
crumbles into fragments."
Our friend had not observed with what expressiveness Aurelia pronounced those
words. Looking only at this work of art, at its connection and completeness, he
dreamed not that his auditress was feeling quite a different influence; that a deep
sorrow of her own was vividly awakened in her breast by these dramatic shadows.

Aurelia's head was still resting on her arms; and her eyes, now full of tears, were
turned to the sky. At last, no longer able to conceal her secret grief, she seized both
hands of her friend, and exclaimed, while he stood surprised before her, "Forgive,
forgive a heavy heart! I am girt and pressed together by these people; from my hardhearted brother I must seek to hide myself; your presence has untied these bonds. My
friend!" continued she, "it is but a few minutes since we saw each other first, and
already you are going to become my confidant." She could scarcely end the words, and
sank upon his shoulder. "Think not worse of me," she said, with sobs, "that I disclose
myself to you so hastily, that I am so weak before you. Be my friend, remain my friend:
I shall deserve it." He spoke to her in his kindest manner, but in vain: her tears still
flowed, and choked her words.
At this moment Serlo entered, most unwelcomely, and, most unexpectedly, Philina,
with her hand in his. "Here is your friend," said he to her: "he will be glad to welcome
you."
"What!" cried Wilhelm in astonishment: "are you here?" With a modest, settled mien,
she went up to him; bade him welcome; praised Serlo's goodness, who, she said,
without merit on her part, but purely in the hope of her improvement, had agreed to
admit her into his accomplished troop. She behaved, all the while, in a friendly manner
towards Wilhelm, yet with a dignified distance.
But this dissimulation lasted only till the other two were gone. Aurelia having left
them, that she might conceal her trouble, and Serlo being called away, Philina first
looked very sharply at the doors, to see that both were really out; then began skipping
to and fro about the room, as if she had been mad; at last dropped down upon the
floor, like to die of giggling and laughing. She then sprang up, patted and flattered our
friend; rejoicing above measure that she had been clever enough to go before, and spy
the land, and get herself nestled in.
"Pretty things are going on here," she said; "just of the sort I like. Aurelia has had a
hapless love-affair with some nobleman, who seems to be a very stately person, one
whom I myself could like to see some day. He has left her a memorial, or I much
mistake. There is a boy running about the house, of three years old or so: the papa
must be a very pretty fellow. Commonly I cannot suffer children, but this brat quite
delights me. I have calculated Aurelia's business. The death of her husband, the new
acquaintance, the child's age,—all things agree.

"But now her spark has gone his ways: for a year she has not seen a glimpse of him.
She is beside herself and inconsolable on this account. The more fool she! Her brother
has a dancing-girl in his troop, with whom he stands on pretty terms; an actress with
whom he is intimate; in the town, some other women whom he courts; I, too, am on
his list. The more fool he! Of the rest thou shalt hear to-morrow. And now one word
about Philina, whom thou knowest: the arch-fool is fallen in love with thee." She swore
it was true and prime sport. She earnestly requested Wilhelm to fall in love with
Aurelia, for then the chase would be worth beholding. "She pursues her faithless
swain, thou her, I thee, her brother me. If that will not divert us for a quarter of a year,
I engage to die at the first episode which occurs in this four times complicated tale."
She begged of him not to spoil her trade, and to show her such respect as her external
conduct should deserve.

CHAPTER XV.
Next morning Wilhelm went to visit Frau Melina, but found her not at home. On
inquiring here for the other members of the wandering community, he learned that
Philina had invited them to breakfast. Out of curiosity, he hastened thither, and found
them all in very good spirits and of good comfort. The cunning creature had collected
them, was treating them with chocolate, and giving them to understand that some
prospects still remained for them; that, by her influence, she hoped to convince the
manager how advantageous it would be for him to introduce so many clever hands
among his company. They listened to her with attention; swallowed cup after cup of
her chocolate; thought the girl was not so bad, after all, and went away proposing to
themselves to speak whatever good of her they could.
"Do you think, then," said our friend, who staid behind, "that Serlo will determine to
retain our comrades?"—"Not at all," replied Philina; "nor do I care a fig for it. The
sooner they are gone, the better! Laertes alone I could wish to keep: the rest we shall
by and by pack off."
Next she signified to Wilhelm her firm persuasion that he should no longer hide his
talent, but, under the direction of a Serlo, go upon the boards. She was lavish in her
praises of the order, the taste, the spirit, which prevailed in this establishment: she
spoke so flatteringly to Wilhelm, with such admiration of his gifts, that his heart and
his imagination were advancing towards this proposal as fast as his understanding and
his reason were retreating from it. He concealed his inclination from himself and from
Philina, and passed a restless day, unable to resolve on visiting his trading
correspondents, to receive the letters which might there be lying for him. The anxieties
of his people during all this time he easily conceived; yet he shrank from the precise
account of them, particularly at the present time, as he promised to himself a great
and pure enjoyment from the exhibition of a new play that evening.
Serlo had refused to let him witness the rehearsal. "You must see us on the best side,"
he observed, "before we can allow you to look into our cards."
The performance, however, where our friend did not fail to be present, yielded him a
high satisfaction. It was the first time he had ever seen a theatre in such perfection.
The actors were evidently all possessed of excellent gifts, superior capacities, and a
high, clear notion of their art; they were not equal, but they mutually restrained and
supported one another; each breathed ardor into those around him; throughout all

their acting, they showed themselves decided and correct. You soon felt that Serlo was
the soul of the whole: as an individual, he appeared to much advantage. A merry
humor, a measured vivacity, a settled feeling of propriety, combined with a great gift
of imitation, were to be observed in him the moment he appeared upon the stage. The
inward contentment of his being seemed to spread itself over all that looked on him;
and the intellectual style in which he could so easily and gracefully express the finest
shadings of his part, excited more delight, as he could conceal the art which, by longcontinued practice, he had made his own.
Aurelia, his sister, was not inferior: she obtained still greater approbation; for she
touched the souls of the audience, which he had it in his power to exhilarate and
amuse.
After a few days had passed pleasantly enough, Aurelia sent to inquire for our friend.
He hastened to her: she was lying on a sofa; she seemed to be suffering from
headache; her whole frame had visibly a feverish movement. Her eye lighted up as she
noticed Wilhelm. "Pardon me!" she cried, as he entered: "the trust you have inspired
me with has made me weak. Till now I have contrived to bear up against my woes in
secret; nay, they gave me strength and consolation: but now, I know not how it is, you
have loosened the bands of silence. You will now, even against your will, take part in
the battle I am fighting with myself!"
Wilhelm answered her in kind and obliging terms. He declared that her image and her
sorrows had not ceased to hover in his thoughts; that he longed for her confidence,
and devoted himself to be her friend.
While he spoke, his eyes were attracted to the boy, who sat before her on the floor,
and was busy rattling a multitude of playthings. This child, as Philina had observed,
might be about three years of age; and Wilhelm now conceived how that giddy
creature, seldom elevated in her phraseology, had likened it to the sun. For its cheerful
eyes and full countenance were shaded by the finest golden locks, which flowed round
in copious curls; dark, slender, softly bending eyebrows showed themselves upon a
brow of dazzling whiteness; and the living tinge of health was glancing on its cheeks.
"Sit by me," said Aurelia: "you are looking at the happy child with admiration; in truth, I
took it into my arms with joy; I keep it carefully; yet, by it, too, I can measure the
extent of my sufferings; for they seldom let me feel the worth of such a gift.

"Allow me," she continued, "to speak to you about myself and my destiny; for I have it
much at heart that you should not misunderstand me. I thought I should have a few
calm instants; and, accordingly, I sent for you. You are now here, and the thread of my
narrative is lost.
"'One more forsaken woman in the world!' you will say. You are a man. You are
thinking, 'What a noise she makes, the fool, about a necessary evil; which, certainly as
death, awaits a woman, when such is the fidelity of men!' O my friend! if my fate were
common, I would gladly undergo a common evil; but it is so singular! why cannot I
present it to you in a mirror,—why not command some one to tell it you? Oh! had I,
had I been seduced, surprised, and afterwards forsaken, there would then still be
comfort in despair; but I am far more miserable. I have been my own deceiver; I have
wittingly betrayed myself; and this, this, is what shall never be forgiven me."
"With noble feelings, such as yours," said Wilhelm, "you cannot be entirely unhappy."
"And do you know to what I am indebted for my feelings?" asked Aurelia. "To the
worst education that ever threatened to contaminate a girl; to the vilest examples for
misleading the senses and inclinations.
"My mother dying early, the fairest years of my youth were spent with an aunt, whose
principle it was to despise the laws of decency. She resigned herself headlong to every
impulse, careless whether the object of it proved her tyrant or her slave, so she might
forget herself in wild enjoyment.
"By children, with the pure, clear vision of innocence, what ideas of men were
necessarily formed in such a scene! How stolid, brutally bold, importunate,
unmannerly, was every one she allured! How sated, empty, insolent, and insipid, as
soon as he had had his wishes gratified! I have seen this woman live, for years,
humbled under the control of the meanest creatures. What incidents she had to
undergo! With what a front she contrived to accommodate herself to her destiny; nay,
with how much skill, to wear these shameful fetters!
"It was thus, my friend, that I became acquainted with your sex; and deeply did I hate
it, when, as I imagined, I observed that even tolerable men, in their conduct to ours,
appeared to renounce every honest feeling, of which nature might otherwise have
made them capable.

"Unhappily, moreover, on such occasions, a multitude of painful discoveries about my
own sex were forced upon me; and, in truth, I was then wiser, as a girl of sixteen, than
I now am, now that I scarcely understand myself. Why are we so wise when young,—
so wise, and ever growing less so?"
The boy began to make a noise: Aurelia became impatient, and rang. An old woman
came to take him out. "Hast thou toothache still?" said Aurelia to the crone, whose
face was wrapped in cloth. "Unsufferable," said the other, with a muffled voice, then
lifted the boy, who seemed to like going with her, and carried him away.
Scarcely was he gone, when Aurelia began bitterly to weep. "I am good for nothing,"
cried she, "but lamenting and complaining; and I feel ashamed to lie before you like a
miserable worm. My recollection is already fled: I can relate no more." She faltered,
and was silent. Her friend, unwilling to reply with a commonplace, and unable to reply
with any thing particularly applicable, pressed her hand, and looked at her for some
time without speaking. Thus embarrassed, he at length took up a book, which he
noticed lying on the table before him: it was Shakspeare's works, and open at
"Hamlet."
Serlo, at this moment entering, inquired about his sister, and, looking in the book
which our friend had hold of, cried, "So you are again at 'Hamlet'? Very good! Many
doubts have arisen in me, which seem not a little to impair the canonical aspect of the
play as you would have it viewed. The English themselves have admitted that its chief
interest concludes with the third act; the last two lagging sorrily on, and scarcely
uniting with the rest: and certainly about the end it seems to stand stock-still."
"It is very possible," said Wilhelm, "that some individuals of a nation, which has so
many masterpieces to feel proud of, may be led by prejudice and narrowness of mind
to form false judgments; but this cannot hinder us from looking with our own eyes,
and doing justice where we see it due. I am very far from censuring the plan of
'Hamlet': on the other hand, I believe there never was a grander one invented; nay, it
is not invented, it is real."
"How do you demonstrate that?" inquired Serlo.
"I will not demonstrate any thing," said Wilhelm: "I will merely show you what my own
conceptions of it are."

Aurelia raised herself from her cushion, leaned upon her hand, and looked at Wilhelm,
who, with the firmest assurance that he was in the right, went on as follows: "It
pleases us, it flatters us, to see a hero acting on his own strength, loving and hating at
the bidding of his heart, undertaking and completing, casting every obstacle aside, and
attaining some great end. Poets and historians would willingly persuade us that so
proud a lot may fall to man. In 'Hamlet' we are taught another lesson: the hero is
without a plan, but the play is full of plan. Here we have no villain punished on some
self-conceived and rigidly accomplished scheme of vengeance: a horrid deed is done; it
rolls along with all its consequences, dragging with it even the guiltless: the guilty
perpetrator would, as it seems, evade the abyss made ready for him; yet he plunges in,
at the very point by which he thinks he shall escape, and happily complete his course.
"For it is the property of crime to extend its mischief over innocence, as it is of virtue
to extend its blessings over many that deserve them not; while frequently the author
of the one or of the other is not punished or rewarded at all. Here in this play of ours,
how strange! The Pit of darkness sends its spirit and demands revenge: in vain! All
circumstances tend one way, and hurry to revenge: in vain! Neither earthly nor
infernal thing may bring about what is reserved for Fate alone. The hour of judgment
comes; the wicked falls with the good; one race is mowed away, that another may
spring up."
After a pause, in which they looked at one another, Serlo said, "You pay no great
compliment to Providence, in thus exalting Shakspeare; and besides, it appears to me,
that for the honor of your poet, as others for the honor of Providence, you ascribe to
him an object and a plan such as he himself had never thought of."

CHAPTER XVI.
"Let me also put a question," said Aurelia. "I have looked at Ophelia's part again: I am
contented with it, and confident, that, under certain circumstances, I could play it. But
tell me, should not the poet have furnished the insane maiden with another sort of
songs? Could not some fragments out of melancholy ballads be selected for this
purpose? Why put double meanings and lascivious insipidities in the mouth of this
noble-minded girl?"
"Dear friend," said Wilhelm, "even here I cannot yield you one iota. In these
singularities, in this apparent impropriety, a deep sense is hid. Do we not understand
from the very first what the mind of the good, soft-hearted girl was busied with?
Silently she lived within herself, yet she scarce concealed her wishes, her longing: the
tones of desire were in secret ringing through her soul; and how often may she have
attempted, like an unskilful nurse, to lull her senses to repose with songs which only
kept them more awake? But at last, when her self-command is altogether gone, when
the secrets of her heart are hovering on her tongue, that tongue betrays her; and in
the innocence of insanity she solaces herself, unmindful of king or queen, with the
echo of her loose and well-beloved songs,—'To-morrow is Saint Valentine's Day,' and
'By Gis and by Saint Charity.'"
He had not finished speaking, when all at once an extraordinary scene took place
before him, which he could not in any way explain.
Serlo had walked once or twice up and down the room, without evincing any special
object. On a sudden, he stepped forward to Aurelia's dressing-table, caught hastily at
something that was lying there, and hastened to the door with his booty. No sooner
did Aurelia notice this, than, springing up, she threw herself in his way, laid hold of him
with boundless vehemence, and had dexterity enough to clutch an end of the article
he was carrying off. They struggled and wrestled with great obstinacy, twisted and
threw each other sharply round; he laughed; she exerted all her strength; and as
Wilhelm hastened towards them, to separate and soothe them, Aurelia sprang aside
with a naked dagger in her hand; while Serlo cast the scabbard, which had staid with
him, angrily upon the floor. Wilhelm started back astonished; and his dumb wonder
seemed to ask the cause why so violent a strife, about so strange an implement, had
taken place between them.

"You shall judge betwixt us," said the brother. "What business she with sharp steel? Do
but look at it. That dagger is unfit for any actress,—point like a needle's, edge like a
razor's! What good's the farce? Passionate as she is, she will one day chance to do
herself a mischief. I have a heart's hatred at such singularities: a serious thought of
that sort is insane, and so dangerous a plaything is not in taste."
"I have it back!" exclaimed Aurelia, and held the polished blade aloft: "I will now keep
my faithful friend more carefully. Pardon me," she cried, and kissed the steel, "that I
have so neglected thee."
Serlo was like to grow seriously angry. "Take it as thou wilt, brother," she continued:
"how knowest thou but, under this form, a precious talisman may have been given me,
so that, in extreme need, I may find help and counsel in it? Must all be hurtful that
looks dangerous?"
"Such talk without a meaning might drive one mad," said Serlo, and left the room with
suppressed indignation. Aurelia put the dagger carefully into its sheath, and placed it in
her bosom. "Let us now resume the conversation which our foolish brother has
disturbed," said she, as Wilhelm was beginning to put questions on the subject of this
quarrel.
"I must admit your picture of Ophelia to be just," continued she; "I cannot now
misunderstand the object of the poet: I must pity; though, as you paint her, I shall
rather pity her than sympathize with her. But allow me here to offer a remark, which in
these few days you have frequently suggested to me. I observe with admiration the
correct, keen, penetrating glance with which you judge of poetry, especially dramatic
poetry: the deepest abysses of invention are not hidden from you, the finest touches
of representation cannot escape you. Without ever having viewed the objects in
nature, you recognize the truth of their images: there seems, as it were, a
presentiment of all the universe to lie in you, which by the harmonious touch of poetry
is awakened and unfolded. For in truth," continued she, "from without, you receive not
much: I have scarcely seen a person that so little knew, so totally misknew, the people
he lived with, as you do. Allow me to say it: in hearing you expound the mysteries of
Shakspeare, one would think you had just descended from a synod of the gods, and
had listened there while they were taking counsel how to form men; in seeing you
transact with your fellows, I could imagine you to be the first large-born child of the
Creation, standing agape, and gazing with strange wonderment and edifying good

nature at lions and apes and sheep and elephants, and true-heartedly addressing them
as your equals, simply because they were there, and in motion like yourself."
"The feeling of my ignorance in this respect," said Wilhelm, "often gives me pain; and I
should thank you, worthy friend, if you would help me to get a little better insight into
life. From youth, I have been accustomed to direct the eyes of my spirit inwards rather
than outwards; and hence it is very natural, that, to a certain extent, I should be
acquainted with man, while of men I have not the smallest knowledge."
"In truth," said Aurelia, "I at first suspected, that, in giving such accounts of the people
whom you sent to my brother, you meant to make sport of us: when I compared your
letters with the merits of these persons, it seemed very strange."
Aurelia's remarks, well founded as they might be, and willing as our friend was to
confess himself deficient in this matter, carried with them something painful, nay,
offensive, to him; so that he grew silent, and retired within himself, partly to avoid
showing any irritated feeling, partly to search his mind for the truth or error of the
charge.
"Let not this alarm you," said Aurelia: "the light of the understanding it is always in our
power to reach, but this fulness of the heart no one can give us. If you are destined for
an artist, you cannot long enough retain the dim-sightedness and innocence of which I
speak; it is the beautiful hull upon the young bud; woe to us if we are forced too soon
to burst it! Surely it were well, if we never knew what the people are for whom we
work and study.
"Oh! I, too, was in that happy case, when I first betrod the stage, with the loftiest
opinion of myself and of my nation. What a people, in my fancy, were the Germans!
what a people might they yet become! I addressed this people, raised above them by a
little joinery, separated from them by a row of lamps, whose glancing and vapor threw
an indistinctness over every thing before me. How welcome was the tumult of
applause which sounded to me from the crowd! how gratefully did I accept the
present offered me unanimously by so many hands! For a time I rocked myself in these
ideas: I affected the multitude, and was again affected by them. With my public I was
on the fairest footing: I imagined that I felt a perfect harmony betwixt us, and that on
each occasion I beheld before me the best and noblest of the land.

"Unhappily it was not the actress alone that inspired these friends of the stage with
interest: they likewise made pretensions to the young and lively girl. They gave me to
understand, in terms distinct enough, that my duty was, not only to excite emotion in
them, but to share it with them personally. This, unluckily, was not my business: I
wished to elevate their minds; but, to what they called their hearts, I had not the
slightest claim. Yet now men of all ranks, ages, and characters, by turns afflicted me
with their addresses; and it did seem hard that I could not, like an honest young
woman, shut my door, and spare myself such a quantity of labor.
"The men appeared, for most part, much the same as I had been accustomed to about
my aunt; and here again I should have felt disgusted with them, had not their
peculiarities and insipidities amused me. As I was compelled to see them, in the
theatre, in open places, in my house, I formed the project of spying out their follies;
and my brother helped me with alacrity to execute it. And if you reflect, that up from
the whisking shopman and the conceited merchant's son, to the polished, calculating
man of the world, the bold soldier, and the impetuous prince, all in succession passed
in review before me, each in his way endeavoring to found his small romance, you will
pardon me if I conceived that I had gained some acquaintance with my nation.
"The fantastically dizened student; the awkward, humbly proud man of letters; the
sleek-fed, gouty canon; the solemn, heedful man of office; the heavy country-baron;
the smirking, vapid courtier; the young, erring parson; the cool as well as the quick and
sharply speculating merchant,—all these I have seen in motion; and I swear to you,
that there were few among them fitted to inspire me even with a sentiment of
toleration: on the contrary, I felt it altogether irksome to collect, with tedium and
annoyance, the suffrages of fools; to pocket those applauses in detail, which in their
accumulated state had so delighted me, which in the gross I had appropriated with
such pleasure.
"If I expected a rational compliment upon my acting, if I hoped that they would praise
an author whom I valued, they were sure to make one empty observation on the back
of another, and to name some vapid play in which they wished to see me act. If I
listened in their company, to hear if some noble, brilliant, witty thought had met with
a response among them, and would re-appear from some of them in proper season, it
was rare that I could catch an echo of it. An error that had happened, a
mispronunciation, a provincialism of some actor, such were the weighty points by
which they held fast, beyond which they could not pass. I knew not, in the end, to

what hand I should turn: themselves they thought too clever to be entertained; and
me they imagined they were well entertaining, if they romped and made noise enough
about me. I began very cordially to despise them all: I felt as if the whole nation had,
on purpose, deputed these people to debase it in my eyes. They appeared to me so
clownish, so ill-bred, so wretchedly instructed, so void of pleasing qualities, so
tasteless, I frequently exclaimed, "No German can buckle his shoes, till he has learned
to do it of some foreign nation!"
"You perceive how blind, how unjust and splenetic, I was; and, the longer it lasted, my
spleen increased. I might have killed myself with these things, but I fell into the
contrary extreme: I married, or, rather, let myself be married. My brother, who had
undertaken to conduct the theatre, wished much to have a helper. His choice lighted
on a young man, who was not offensive to me, who wanted all that my brother had,—
genius, vivacity, spirit, and impetuosity of mind; but who also in return had all that my
brother wanted,—love of order, diligence, and precious gifts in housekeeping, and the
management of money.
"He became my husband, I know not how: we lived together, I do not well know why.
Suffice it to say, our affairs went prosperously forward. We drew a large income: of
this my brother's activity was the cause. We lived with a moderate expenditure, and
that was the merit of my husband. I thought no more about world or nation. With the
world I had nothing to participate: my idea of the nation had faded away. When I
entered on the scene, I did so that I might subsist: I opened my lips because I durst not
continue silent, because I had come out to speak.
"Yet let me do the matter justice. I had altogether given myself up to the disposal of
my brother. His objects were, applause and money; for, between ourselves, he has no
dislike to hear his own praises; and his outlay is always great. I no longer played
according to my own feeling, to my own conviction, but as he directed me; and, if I did
it to his satisfaction, I was content. He steered entirely by the caprices of the public.
Money flowed upon us: he could live according to his humor, and so we had good
times with him.
"Thus had I fallen into a dull, handicraft routine. I spun out my days without joy or
sympathy. My marriage was childless, and not of long continuance. My husband grew
sick; his strength was visibly decaying; anxiety for him interrupted my general
indifference. It was at this time that I formed an acquaintance which opened a new life
for me,—a new and quicker one, for it will soon be done."

She kept silence for a time, and then continued, "All at once my prattling humor
falters: I have not the courage to go on. Let me rest a little. You shall not go, till you
have learned the whole extent of my misfortune. Meanwhile, call in Mignon, and ask
her what she wants."
The child had more than once been in the room, while Aurelia and our friend were
talking. As they spoke lower on her entrance, she had glided out again, and was now
sitting quietly in the hall, and waiting. Being bid return, she brought a book with her,
which its form and binding showed to be a small geographical atlas. She had seen
some maps, for the first time, at the parson's house, with great astonishment; had
asked him many questions, and informed herself so far as possible about them. Her
desire to learn seemed much excited by this new branch of knowledge. She now
earnestly requested Wilhelm to purchase her the book; saying she had pawned her
large silver buckle with the print-seller for it, and wished to have back the pledge tomorrow morning, as this evening it was late. Her request was granted; and she then
began repeating several things she had already learned; at the same time, in her own
way, making many very strange inquiries. Here again one might observe, that, with a
mighty effort, she could comprehend but little and laboriously. So likewise was it with
her writing, at which she still kept busied. She yet spoke very broken German: it was
only when she opened her mouth to sing, when she touched her cithern, that she
seemed to be employing an organ by which, in some degree, the workings of her mind
could be disclosed and communicated.
Since we are at present on the subject, we may also mention the perplexity which
Wilhelm had of late experienced from certain parts of her procedure, When she came
or went, wished him good-morning or good-night, she clasped him so firmly in her
arms, and kissed him with such ardor, that often the violence of this expanding nature
gave him serious fears. The spasmodic vivacity of her demeanor seemed daily to
increase: her whole being moved in a restless stillness. She would never be without
some piece of packthread to twist in her hands, some napkin to tie in knots, some
paper or wood to chew. All her sports seemed but the channels which drained off
some inward violent commotion. The only thing that seemed to cause her any
cheerfulness was being near the boy Felix, with whom she could go on in a very dainty
manner.
Aurelia, after a little rest, being now ready to explain to her friend a matter which lay
very near her heart, grew impatient at the little girl's delay, and signified that she must

go,—a hint, however, which the latter did not take; and at last, when nothing else
would do, they sent her off expressly and against her will.
"Now or never," said Aurelia, "must I tell you the remainder of my story. Were my
tenderly beloved and unjust friend but a few miles distant, I would say to you, 'Mount
on horseback, seek by some means to get acquainted with him: on returning, you will
certainly forgive me, and pity me with all your heart.' As it is, I can only tell you with
words how amiable he was, and how much I loved him.
"It was at the critical season, when care for the illness of my husband had depressed
my spirits, that I first became acquainted with this stranger. He had just returned from
America, where, in company with some Frenchmen, he had served with much
distinction under the colors of the United States.
"He addressed me with an easy dignity, a frank kindliness: he spoke about myself, my
state, my acting, like an old acquaintance, so affectionately and distinctly, that now for
the first time I enjoyed the pleasure of perceiving my existence reflected in the being
of another. His judgments were just, though not severe; penetrating, yet not void of
love. He showed no harshness: his pleasantry was courteous, with all his humor. He
seemed accustomed to success with women; this excited my attention: he was never
in the least importunate or flattering; this put me off my guard.
"In the town, he had intercourse with few: he was often on horseback, visiting his
many friends in the neighborhood, and managing the business of his house. On
returning, he would frequently alight at my apartments; he treated my ever-ailing
husband with warm attention; he procured him mitigation of his sickness by a good
physician. And, taking part in all that interested me, he allowed me to take part in all
that interested him. He told me the history of his campaigns: he spoke of his invincible
attachment to military life, of his family relations, of his present business. He kept no
secret from me; he displayed to me his inmost thoughts, allowed me to behold the
most secret corners of his soul: I became acquainted with his passions and his
capabilities. It was the first time in my life that I enjoyed a cordial, intellectual
intercourse with any living creature. I was attracted by him, borne along by him,
before I thought about inquiring how it stood with me.
"Meanwhile I lost my husband, nearly just as I had taken him. The burden of theatrical
affairs now fell entirely on me. My brother, not to be surpassed upon the stage, was
never good for any thing in economical concerns: I took the charge of all, at the same

time studying my parts with greater diligence than ever. I again played as of old,—nay,
with new life, with quite another force. It was by reason of my friend, it was on his
account, that I did so; yet my success was not always best when I knew him to be
present. Once or twice he listened to me unobserved, and how pleasantly his
unexpected applauses surprised me you may conceive.
"Certainly I am a strange creature. In every part I played, it seemed as if I had been
speaking it in praise of him; for that was the temper of my heart, the words might be
any thing they pleased. Did I understand him to be present in the audience, I durst not
venture to speak out with all my force; just as I would not press my love or praise on
him to his face: was he absent, I had then free scope; I did my best, with a certain
peacefulness, with a contentment not to be described. Applause once more delighted
me; and, when I charmed the people, I longed to call down among them, 'This you owe
to him!'
"Yes: my relation to the public, to the nation, had been altered by a wonder. On a
sudden they again appeared to me in the most favorable light: I felt astonished at my
former blindness.
"'How foolish,' said I often to myself, 'was it to revile a nation,—foolish, simply because
it was a nation. Is it necessary, is it possible, that individual men should generally
interest us much? Not at all! The only question is, whether in the great mass
there exists a sufficient quantity of talent, force, and capability, which lucky
circumstances may develop, which men of lofty minds may direct upon a common
object.' I now rejoiced in discovering so little prominent originality among my
countrymen; I rejoiced that they disdained not to accept of guidance from without; I
rejoiced that they had found a leader.
"Lothario,—allow me to designate my friend by this, his first name, which I loved,—
Lothario had always presented the Germans to my mind on the side of valor, and
shown me, that, when well commanded, there was no braver nation on the face of the
earth; and I felt ashamed that I had never thought of this, the first quality of a people.
History was known to him: he was in connection and correspondence with the most
distinguished persons of the age. Young as he was, his eye was open to the budding
youthhood of his native country, to the silent labors of active and busy men in so many
provinces of art. He afforded me a glimpse of Germany,—what it was and what it
might be; and I blushed at having formed my judgment of a nation from the motley
crowd that squeeze into the wardrobe of a theatre. He made me look upon it as a duty

that I too, in my own department, should be true, spirited, enlivening. I now felt as if
inspired every time I stepped upon the boards. Mediocre passages grew golden in my
mouth: had any poet been at hand to support me adequately, I might have produced
the most astonishing effects.
"So lived the young widow for a series of months. He could not do without me, and I
felt exceedingly unhappy when he staid away. He showed me the letters he received
from his relations, from his amiable sister. He took an interest in the smallest
circumstance that concerned me: more complete, more intimate, no union ever was
than ours. The name of love was not mentioned. He went and came, came and went.
And now, my friend, it is high time that you, too, should go."

CHAPTER XVII.
Wilhelm could put off no longer the visiting of his commercial friends. He proceeded to
their place with some anxiety, knowing he should there find letters from his people. He
dreaded the reproofs which these would of course contain: it seemed likely also that
notice had been given to his trading correspondents, concerning the perplexities and
fears which his late silence had occasioned. After such a series of knightly adventures,
he recoiled from the school-boy aspect in which he must appear: he proposed within
his mind to act with an air of sternness and defiance, and thus hide his
embarrassment.
To his great wonder and contentment, however, all went off very easily and well. In
the vast, stirring, busy counting-room, the men had scarcely time to seek him out his
packet: his delay was but alluded to in passing. And on opening the letters of his
father, and his friend Werner, he found them all of very innocent contents. His father,
in hopes of an extensive journal, the keeping of which he had strongly recommended
to his son at parting, giving him also a tabulary scheme for that purpose, seemed
pretty well pacified about the silence of the first period; complaining only of a certain
enigmatical obscurity in the last and only letter despatched, as we have seen, from the
castle of the count. Werner joked in his way; told merry anecdotes, facetious burghnews; and requested intelligence of friends and acquaintances, whom Wilhelm, in the
large trading-city, would now meet with in great numbers. Our friend, extremely
pleased at getting off so well, answered without loss of a moment, in some very
cheerful letters; promising his father a copious journal of his travels, with all the
required geographical, statistical, and mercantile remarks. He had seen much on his
journey, he said, and hoped to make a tolerably large manuscript out of these
materials. He did not observe that he was almost in the same case as he had once
experienced before, when he assembled an audience and lit his lamps to represent a
play which was not written, still less got by heart. Accordingly, so soon as he
commenced the actual work of composition, he became aware that he had much to
say about emotions and thoughts, and many experiences of the heart and spirit, but
not a word concerning outward objects, on which, as he now discovered, he had not
bestowed the least attention.
In this embarrassment, the acquisitions of his friend Laertes came very seasonably to
his aid. Custom had united these young people, unlike one another as they were; and
Laertes, with all his failings and singularities, was actually an interesting man. Endowed

with warm and pleasurable senses, he might have reached old age without reflecting
for a moment on his situation. But his ill-fortune and his sickness had robbed him of
the pure feelings of youth, and opened for him instead of it a view into the
transitoriness, the discontinuity, of man's existence. Hence had arisen a humorous,
flighty, rhapsodical way of thinking about all things, or, rather, of uttering the
immediate impressions they produced on him. He did not like to be alone; he strolled
about all the coffee-houses and tables-d'hôte; and, when he did stay at home, books of
travels were his favorite, nay, his only, kind of reading. Having lately found a large
circulating library, he had been enabled to content his taste in this respect to the full;
and erelong half the world was figuring in his faithful memory.
It was easy for him, therefore, to speak comfort to his friend, when the latter had
disclosed his utter lack of matter for the narrative so solemnly promised by him. "Now
is the time for a stroke of art," said Laertes, "that shall have no fellow!
"Has not Germany been travelled over, cruised over, walked, crept, and flown over,
repeatedly from end to end? And has not every German traveller the royal privilege of
drawing from the public a repayment of the great or small expenses he may have
incurred while travelling? Give me your route previous to our meeting: the rest I know
already. I will find you helps and sources of information: of miles that were never
measured, populations that were never counted, we shall give them plenty. The
revenues of provinces we will take from almanacs and tables, which, as all men know,
are the most authentic documents. On these we will ground our political discussions:
we shall not fail in side-glances at the ruling powers. One or two princes we will paint
as true fathers of their country, that we may gain more ready credence in our
allegations against others. If we do not travel through the residence of any noted man,
we shall take care to meet such persons at the inn, and make them utter the most
foolish stuff to us. Particularly, let us not forget to insert, with all its graces and
sentiments, some love-story with a pastoral bar-maid. I tell you, it shall be a
composition which will not only fill father and mother with delight, but which
booksellers themselves shall gladly pay you current money for."
They went accordingly to work, and both of them found pleasure in their labor.
Wilhelm, in the mean time, frequenting the play at night, and conversing with Serlo
and Aurelia by day, experienced the greatest satisfaction, and was daily more and
more expanding his ideas, which had been too long revolving in the same narrow
circle.

CHAPTER XVIII.
It was not without deep interest that he became acquainted with the history of Serlo's
career. Piecemeal he learned it; for it was not the fashion of that extraordinary man to
be confidential, or to speak of any thing connectively. He had been, one may say, born
and suckled in the theatre. While yet literally an infant, he had been produced upon
the stage to move spectators, merely by his presence; for authors even then were
acquainted with this natural and very guiltless mode of doing so. Thus his first
"Father!" or "Mother!" in favorite pieces, procured him approbation, before he
understood what was meant by that clapping of the hands. In the character of Cupid,
he more than once descended, with terror, in his flying-gear; as harlequin, he used to
issue from the egg; and, as a little chimney-sweep, to play the sharpest tricks.
Unhappily, the plaudits of these glancing nights were too bitterly repaid by sufferings
in the intervening seasons. His father was persuaded that the minds of children could
be kept awake and steadfast by no other means than blows: hence, in the studying of
any part, he used to thrash him at stated periods, not because the boy was awkward,
but that he might become more certainly and constantly expert. It was thus that in
former times, while putting down a landmark, people were accustomed to bestow a
hearty drubbing on the children who had followed them: and these, it was supposed,
would recollect the place exactly to the latest day of their lives. Serlo waxed in stature,
and showed the finest capabilities of spirit and of body,—in particular, an admirable
pliancy at once in his thoughts, looks, movements, and gestures. His gift of imitation
was beyond belief. When still a boy, he could mimic persons, so that you would think
you saw them; though in form, age, and disposition, they might be entirely unlike him,
and unlike each other. Nor with all this, did he want the knack of suiting himself to his
circumstances, and picking out his way in life. Accordingly, so soon as he had grown in
some degree acquainted with his strength, he very naturally eloped from his father,
who, as the boy's understanding and dexterity increased, still thought it needful to
forward their perfection by the harshest treatment.
Happy was the wild boy, now roaming free about the world, where his feats of
waggery never failed to secure him a good reception. His lucky star first led him in the
Christmas season to a cloister, where the friar, whose business it had been to arrange
processions, and to entertain the Christian community by spiritual masquerades,
having just died, Serlo was welcomed as a helping angel. On the instant he took up the
part of Gabriel in the Annunciation, and did not by any means displease the pretty girl,

who, acting the Virgin, very gracefully received his most obliging kiss, with external
humility and inward pride. In their Mysteries, he continued to perform the most
important parts, and thought himself no slender personage, when at last, in the
character of Martyr, he was mocked of the world, and beaten, and fixed upon the
cross.
Some pagan soldiers had, on this occasion, played their parts a little too naturally. To
be avenged on these heathen in the proper style, he took care at the Day of Judgment
to have them decked out in gaudy clothes as emperors and kings; and at that moment
when they, exceedingly contented with their situation, were about to take precedence
of the rest in heaven, as they had done on earth, he, on a sudden, rushed upon them
in the shape of the Devil; and to the cordial edification of all the beggars and
spectators, having thoroughly curried them with his oven-fork, he pushed them
without mercy back into the chasm, where, in the midst of waving flame, they met
with the sorriest welcome.
He was acute enough, however, to perceive that these crowned heads might feel
offended at such bold procedure, and perhaps forget the reverence due to his
privileged office of Accuser and Turnkey. So in all silence, before the Millennium
commenced, he withdrew, and betook him to a neighboring town. Here a society of
persons, denominated Children of Joy, received him with open arms. They were a set
of clever, strong-headed, lively geniuses, who saw well enough that the sum of our
existence, divided by reason, never gives an integer number, but that a surprising
fraction is always left behind. At stated times, to get rid of this fraction, which
impedes, and, if it is diffused over all the mass of our conduct, endangers us, was the
object of the Children of Joy. For one day a week each of them in succession was a fool
on purpose; and, during this, he in his turn exhibited to ridicule, in allegorical
representations, whatever folly he had noticed in himself, or the rest, throughout the
other six. This practice might be somewhat ruder than that constant training, in the
course of which a man of ordinary morals is accustomed to observe, to warn, to
punish, himself daily; but it was also merrier and surer. For as no Child of Joy
concealed his bosom-folly, so he and those about him held it for simply what it was;
whereas, on the other plan, by the help of self-deception, this same bosom-folly often
gains the head authority within, and binds down reason to a secret servitude, at the
very time when reason fondly hopes that she has long since chased it out of doors. The
mask of folly circulated round in this society; and each member was allowed, in his
particular day, to decorate and characterize it with his own attributes or those of

others. At the time of Carnival, they assumed the greatest freedom, vying with the
clergy in attempts to instruct and entertain the multitude. Their solemn figurative
processions of Virtues and Vices, Arts and Sciences, Quarters of the World, and
Seasons of the Year, bodied forth a number of conceptions, and gave images of many
distant objects to the people, and hence were not without their use; while, on the
other hand, the mummeries of the priesthood tended but to strengthen a tasteless
superstition, already strong enough.
Here again young Serlo was altogether in his element. Invention in its strictest sense, it
is true, he had not; but, on the other hand, he had the most consummate skill in
employing what he found before him, in ordering it, and shadowing it forth. His
roguish turns, his gift of mimicry; his biting wit, which at least one day weekly he might
use with entire freedom, even against his benefactors,—made him precious, or rather
indispensable, to the whole society.
Yet his restless mind soon drove him from this favorable scene to other quarters of his
country, where other means of instruction awaited him. He came into the polished,
but also barren, part of Germany, where, in worshipping the good and the beautiful,
there is indeed no want of truth, but frequently a grievous want of spirit. His masks
would here do nothing for him: he had now to aim at working on the heart and mind.
For short periods, he attached himself to small or to extensive companies of actors,
and marked, on these occasions, what were the distinctive properties, both of the
pieces and the players. The monotony which then reigned on the German theatre, the
mawkish sound and cadence of their Alexandrines, the flat and yet distorted dialogue,
the shallowness and commonness of these undisguised preachers of morality, he was
not long in comprehending, or in seizing, at the same time, what little there was that
moved and pleased.
Not only single parts in the current pieces, but the pieces themselves, remained easily
and wholly in his memory, and, along with them, the special tone of any player who
had represented them with approbation. At length, in the course of his rambles, his
money being altogether done, the project struck him of acting entire pieces by himself,
especially in villages and noblemen's houses, and thus in all places making sure at least
of entertainment and lodging. In any tavern, any room, or any garden, he would
accordingly at once set up his theatre: with a roguish seriousness and a show of
enthusiasm, he would contrive to gain the imaginations of his audience, to deceive
their senses, and before their eyes to make an old press into a tower, or a fan into a

dagger. His youthful warmth supplied the place of deep feeling: his vehemence
seemed strength, and his flattery tenderness. Such of the spectators as already knew a
theatre, he put in mind of all that they had seen and heard: in the rest he awakened a
presentiment of something wonderful, and a wish to be more acquainted with it. What
produced an effect in one place he did not fail to repeat in others; and his mind
overflowed with a wicked pleasure when, by the same means, on the spur of the
moment, he could make gulls of all the world.
His spirit was lively, brisk, and unimpeded: by frequently repeating parts and pieces, he
improved very fast. Erelong he could recite and play with more conformity to the
sense than the models whom he had at first imitated. Proceeding thus, he arrived by
degrees at playing naturally; though he did not cease to feign. He seemed transported,
yet he lay in wait for the effect; and his greatest pride was in moving, by successive
touches, the passions of men. The mad trade he drove did itself soon force him to
proceed with a certain moderation; and thus, partly by constraint, partly by instinct, he
learned the art of which so few players seemed to have a notion,—the art of being
frugal in the use of voice and gestures.
Thus did he contrive to tame, and to inspire with interest for him, even rude and
unfriendly men. Being always contented with food and shelter; thankfully accepting
presents of any kind as readily as money, which latter, when he reckoned that he had
enough of it, he frequently declined,—he became a general favorite, was sent about
from one to another with recommendatory letters; and thus he wandered many a day
from castle to castle, exciting much festivity, enjoying much, and meeting in his travels
with the most agreeable and curious adventures.
With such inward coldness of temper, he could not properly be said to love any one;
with such clearness of vision, he could respect no one; in fact, he never looked beyond
the external peculiarities of men; and he merely carried their characters in his mimical
collection. Yet withal, his selfishness was keenly wounded if he did not please every
one and call forth universal applause. How this might be attained, he had studied in
the course of time so accurately, and so sharpened his sense of the matter, that not
only on the stage, but also in common life, he no longer could do otherwise than
flatter and deceive. And thus did his disposition, his talent, and his way of life, work
reciprocally on each other, till by this means he had imperceptibly been formed into a
perfect actor. Nay, by a mode of action and re-action, which is quite natural, though it
seems paradoxical, his recitation, declamation, and gesture improved, by critical

discernment and practice, to a high degree of truth, ease, and frankness; while, in his
life and intercourse with men, he seemed to grow continually more secret, artful, or
even hypocritical and constrained.
Of his fortunes and adventures we perhaps shall speak in another place: it is enough to
remark at present, that in later times, when he had become a man of circumstance, in
possession of a distinct reputation, and of a very good, though not entirely secure,
employment and rank, he was wont, in conversation, partly in the way of irony, partly
of mockery, in a delicate style, to act the sophist, and thus to destroy almost all serious
discussion. This kind of speech he seemed peculiarly fond of using towards Wilhelm,
particularly when the latter took a fancy, as often happened, for introducing any of his
general and theoretical disquisitions. Yet still they liked well to be together: with such
different modes of thinking, the conversation could not fail to be lively. Wilhelm
always wished to deduce every thing from abstract ideas which he had arrived at: he
wanted to have art viewed in all its connections as a whole. He wanted to promulgate
and fix down universal laws; to settle what was right, beautiful, and good: in short, he
treated all things in a serious manner. Serlo, on the other hand, took up the matter
very lightly: never answering directly to any question, he would contrive, by some
anecdote or laughable turn, to give the finest and most satisfactory illustrations, and
thus to instruct his audience while he made them merry.

CHAPTER XIX.
While our friend was in this way living very happily, Melina and the rest were in quite a
different case. Wilhelm they haunted like evil spirits; and not only by their presence,
but frequently by rueful faces and bitter words, they caused him many a sorry
moment. Serlo had not admitted them to the most trifling part, far less held out to
them any hope of a permanent engagement; and yet he had contrived, by degrees, to
get acquainted with the capabilities of every one of them. Whenever any actors were
assembled in leisure hours about him, he was wont to make them read, and frequently
to read along with them. On such occasions he took plays which were by and by to be
acted, which for a long time had remained unacted; and generally by portions. In like
manner, after any first representation, he caused such passages to be repeated as he
had any thing to say upon: by which means he sharpened the discernment of his
actors, and strengthened their certainty of hitting the proper point. And as a person of
slender but correct understanding may produce more agreeable effect on others than
a perplexed and unpurified genius, he would frequently exalt men of mediocre talents,
by the clear views which he imperceptibly afforded them, to a wonderful extent of
power. Nor was it an unimportant item in his scheme, that he likewise had poems read
before him in their meetings; for by these he nourished in his people the feeling of that
charm which a well-pronounced rhythm is calculated to awaken in the soul: whereas,
in other companies, those prose compositions were already getting introduced for
which any tyro was adequate.
On occasions such as these, he had contrived to make himself acquainted with the
new-come players: he had decided what they were, and what they might be, and
silently made up his mind to take advantage of their talents, in a revolution which was
now threatening his own company. For a while he let the matter rest; declined every
one of Wilhelm's intercessions for his comrades, with a shrug of the shoulders; till at
last he saw his time, and altogether unexpectedly made the proposal to our friend,
"that he himself should come upon the stage; that, on this condition, the others, too,
might be admitted."
"These people must not be so useless as you formerly described them," answered
Wilhelm, "if they can now be all received at once; and I suppose their talents would
remain the same without me as with me."
Under seal of secrecy, Serlo hereupon explained his situation,—how his first actor was
giving hints about a rise of salary at the renewal of their contract; how he himself did

not incline conceding this, the rather as the individual in question was no longer in
such favor with the public; how, if he dismissed him, a whole train would follow;
whereby, it was true, his company would lose some good, but likewise some
indifferent, actors. He then showed Wilhelm what he hoped to gain in him, in Laertes,
Old Boisterous, and even Frau Melina. Nay, he promised to procure for the silly Pedant
himself, in the character of Jew, minister, but chiefly of villain, a decided approbation.
Wilhelm faltered; the proposal fluttered him; he knew not what to say. That he might
say something, he rejoined, with a deep-drawn breath, "You speak very graciously
about the good you find and hope to find in us; but how is it with our weak points,
which certainly have not escaped your penetration?"
"These," said Serlo, "by diligence, practice, and reflection, we shall soon make strong
points. Though you are yet but freshmen and bunglers, there is not one among you
that does not warrant expectation more or less: for, so far as I can judge, no stick,
properly so called, is to be met with in the company; and your stick is the only person
that can never be improved, never bent or guided, whether it be self-conceit, stupidity,
or hypochondria, that renders him unpliant."
The manager next stated, in a few words, the terms he meant to offer; requested
Wilhelm to determine soon, and left him in no small perplexity.
In the marvellous composition of those travels, which he had at first engaged with, as
it were, in jest, and was now carrying on in conjunction with Laertes, his mind had by
degrees grown more attentive to the circumstances and the every-day life of the
actual world than it was wont. He now first understood the object of his father in so
earnestly recommending him to keep a journal. He now, for the first time, felt how
pleasant and how useful it might be to become participator in so many trades and
requisitions, and to take a hand in diffusing activity and life into the deepest nooks of
the mountains and forests of Europe. The busy trading-town in which he was; the
unrest of Laertes, who dragged him about to examine every thing,—afforded him the
most impressive image of a mighty centre, from which every thing was flowing out, to
which every thing was coming back; and it was the first time that his spirit, in
contemplating this species of activity, had really felt delight. At such a juncture Serlo's
offer had been made him; had again awakened his desires, his tendencies, his faith in a
natural talent, and again brought into mind his solemn obligation to his helpless
comrades.

"Here standest thou once more," said he within himself, "at the Parting of the Ways,
between the two women who appeared before thee in thy youth. The one no longer
looks so pitiful as then, nor does the other look so glorious. To obey the one, or to
obey the other, thou art not without a kind of inward calling: outward reasons are on
both sides strong enough, and to decide appears to thee impossible. Thou wishest
some preponderancy from without would fix thy choice; and yet, if thou consider well,
it is external circumstances only that inspire thee with a wish to trade, to gather, to
possess; whilst it is thy inmost want that has created, that has nourished, the desire
still further to unfold and perfect what endowments soever for the beautiful and good,
be they mental or bodily, may lie within thee. And ought I not to honor Fate, which,
without furtherance of mine, has led me hither to the goal of all my wishes? Has not all
that I, in old times, meditated and forecast, now happened accidentally, and without
my co-operation? Singular enough! We seem to be so intimate with nothing as we are
with our own wishes and hopes, which have long been kept and cherished in our
hearts; yet when they meet us, when they, as it were, press forward to us, then we
know them not, then we recoil from them. All that, since the hapless night which
severed me from Mariana, I have but allowed myself to dream, now stands before me,
entreating my acceptance. Hither I intended to escape by flight; hither I am softly
guided: with Serlo I meant to seek a place; he now seeks me, and offers me conditions,
which, as a beginner, I could not have looked for. Was it, then, mere love to Mariana
that bound me to the stage? Or love to art that bound me to her? Was that prospect,
that outlet, which the theatre presented me, nothing but the project of a restless,
disorderly, and disobedient boy, wishing to lead a life which the customs of the civic
world would not admit of? Or was all this different, worthier, purer? If so, what moved
thee to alter the persuasions of that period? Hast thou not hitherto, even without
knowing it, pursued thy plan? Is not the concluding step still further to be justified,
now that no side-purposes combine with it; now that in making it thou mayest fulfil a
solemn promise, and nobly free thyself from a heavy debt?"
All that could affect his heart and his imagination was now moving, and conflicting in
the liveliest strife within him. The thought that he might retain Mignon, that he should
not need to put away the harper, was not an inconsiderable item in the balance,
which, however, had not ceased to waver to the one and to the other side, when he
went, as he was wont, to see his friend Aurelia.

CHAPTER XX.
She was lying on the sofa: she seemed quiet. "Do you think you will be fit to act tomorrow?" he inquired. "Oh, yes!" cried she with vivacity: "you know there is nothing to
prevent me. If I but knew a way," continued she, "to rid myself of those applauses! The
people mean it well, but they will kill me. Last night I thought my very heart
would break! Once, when I used to please myself, I could endure this gladly: when I
had studied long, and well prepared myself, it gave me joy to hear the sound, 'It has
succeeded!' pealing back to me from every corner. But now I speak not what I like, nor
as I like; I am swept along, I get confused, I scarce know what I do; and the impression I
make is far deeper. The applause grows louder; and I think, Did you but know what
charms you! These dark, vague, vehement tones of passion move you, force you to
admire; and you feel not that they are the cries of agony, wrung from the miserable
being whom you praise.
"I learned my part this morning: just now I have been repeating it and trying it. I am
tired, broken down; and to-morrow I must do the same. To-morrow evening is the
play. Thus do I drag myself to and fro: it is wearisome to rise, it is wearisome to go to
bed. All moves within me in an everlasting circle. Then come their dreary consolations,
and present themselves before me; and I cast them out, and execrate them. I will not
surrender, not surrender to necessity: why should that be necessary which crushes me
to the dust? Might it not be otherwise? I am paying the penalty of being born a
German: it is the nature of the Germans, that they bear heavily on every thing, that
every thing bears heavily on them."
"O my friend!" cried Wilhelm, "could you cease to whet the dagger wherewith you are
ever wounding me! Does nothing, then, remain for you? Are your youth, your form,
your health, your talents, nothing? Having lost one blessing, without blame of yours,
must you throw all the others after it? Is that also necessary?"
She was silent for a few moments, and then burst forth, "I know well, it is a waste of
time, nothing but a waste of time, this love! What might not, should not, I have done!
And now it is all vanished into air. I am a poor, wretched, lovelorn creature,—lovelorn,
that is all! Oh, have compassion on me! God knows I am poor and wretched!"
She sank in thought: then, after a brief pause, she exclaimed with violence, "You are
accustomed to have all things fly into your arms. No: you cannot feel, no man is
qualified to feel, the worth of a woman that can reverence herself. By all the holy

angels, by all the images of blessedness, which a pure and kindly heart creates, there is
not any thing more heavenly than the soul of a woman giving herself to the man she
loves!
"We are cold, proud, high, clear-sighted, wise, while we deserve the name of women;
and all these qualities we lay down at your feet, the instant that we love, that we hope
to excite a return of love. Oh, how have I cast away my whole existence wittingly and
willingly! But now will I despair, purposely despair. There is no drop of blood within me
but shall suffer, no fibre that I will not punish. Smile, I pray you; laugh at this theatrical
display of passion."
Wilhelm was far enough from any tendency to laugh. This horrible, half-natural, halffactitious condition of his friend afflicted him but too deeply. He sympathized in the
tortures of that racking misery: his thoughts were wandering in painful perplexities, his
blood was in a feverish tumult.
She had risen, and was walking up and down the room. "I see before me," she
exclaimed, "all manner of reasons why I should not love him. I know he is not worthy
of it; I turn my mind aside, this way and that; I seize upon whatever business I can find.
At one time I take up a part, though I have not to play it; at another, I begin to practise
old ones, though I know them through and through; I practise them more diligently,
more minutely,—I toil and toil at them. My friend, my confidant, what a horrid task is it
to tear away one's thoughts from one's self! My reason suffers, my brain is racked and
strained: to save myself from madness, I again admit the feeling that I love him. Yes, I
love him, I love him!" cried she, with a shower of tears: "I love him, I shall die loving
him!"
He took her by the hand, and entreated her in the most earnest manner not to waste
herself in such self-torments. "Oh! it seems hard," said he, "that not only so much that
is impossible should be denied us, but so much also that is possible! It was not your lot
to meet with a faithful heart that would have formed your perfect happiness. It was
mine to fix the welfare of my life upon a hapless creature, whom, by the weight of my
fidelity, I drew to the bottom like a reed, perhaps even broke in pieces!"
He had told Aurelia of his intercourse with Mariana, and could therefore now refer to
it. She looked him intently in the face, and asked, "Can you say that you never yet
betrayed a woman, that you never tried with thoughtless gallantry, with false
asseverations, with cajoling oaths, to wheedle favor from her?"

"I can," said Wilhelm, "and indeed without much vanity: my life has been so simple and
sequestered, I have had but few enticements to attempt such things. And what a
warning, my beautiful, my noble, friend, is this melancholy state in which I see you!
Accept of me a vow, which is suited to my heart; which, under the emotion you have
caused me, has settled into words and shape, and will be hallowed by the hour in
which I utter it. Each transitory inclination I will study to withstand, and even the most
earnest I will keep within my bosom: no woman shall receive an acknowledgment of
love from my lips to whom I cannot consecrate my life!"
She looked at him with a wild indifference, and drew back some steps as he offered
her his hand. "'Tis of no moment!" cried she: "so many women's tears, more or fewer;
the ocean will not swell by reason of them. And yet," continued she, "among
thousands, one woman saved; that still is something: among thousands, one honest
man discovered; this is not to be refused. Do you know, then, what you promise?"
"I know it," answered Wilhelm, with a smile, and holding out his hand.
"I accept it, then," said she, and made a movement with her right hand, as if meaning
to take hold of his; but instantly she darted it into her pocket, pulled out her dagger
quick as lightning, and scored with the edge and point of it across his hand. He hastily
drew it back, but the blood was already running down.
"One must mark you men rather sharply, if one would have you take heed," cried she,
with a wild mirth, which soon passed into a quick assiduity. She took her handkerchief,
and bound his hand with it to stanch the fast-flowing blood. "Forgive a half-crazed
being," cried she, "and regret not these few drops of blood. I am appeased. I am again
myself. On my knees will I crave your pardon: leave me the comfort of healing you."
She ran to her drawer, brought lint, with other apparatus, stanched the blood, and
viewed the wound attentively. It went across the palm, close under the thumb,
dividing the life-line, and running towards the little finger. She bound it up in silence,
with a significant, reflective look. He asked, once or twice, "Aurelia, how could you
hurt your friend?"
"Hush!" replied she, laying her finger on her mouth: "Hush!"

BOOK V.
CHAPTER I.
Thus Wilhelm, to his pair of former wounds, which were yet scarcely healed, had now
got the accession of a third, which was fresh and not a little disagreeable. Aurelia
would not suffer him to call a surgeon: she dressed the hand with all manner of
strange speeches, saws, and ceremonies, and so placed him in a very painful situation.
Yet not he alone, but all persons who came near her, suffered by her restlessness and
singularity, and no one more than little Felix. This stirring child was exceedingly
impatient under such oppression, and showed himself still naughtier the more she
censured and instructed him.
He delighted in some practices which commonly are thought bad habits, and in which
she would not by any means indulge him. He would drink, for example, rather from the
bottle than the glass; and his food seemed visibly to have a better relish when eaten
from the bowl than from the plate. Such ill-breeding was not overlooked: if he left the
door standing open, or slammed it to; if, when bid do any thing, he stood stock-still, or
ran off violently,—he was sure to have a long lecture inflicted on him for the fault. Yet
he showed no symptoms of improvement from this training: on the other hand, his
affection for Aurelia seemed daily to diminish; there was nothing tender in his tone
when he called her mother; whereas he passionately clung to the old nurse, who let
him have his will in every thing.
But she likewise had of late become so sick, that they had at last been obliged to take
her from the house into a quiet lodging; and Felix would have been entirely alone if
Mignon had not, like a kindly guardian spirit, come to help him. The two children
talked together, and amused each other in the prettiest style. She taught him little
songs; and he, having an excellent memory, frequently recited them, to the surprise of
those about him. She attempted also to explain her maps to him. With these she was
still very busy, though she did not seem to take the fittest method. For, in studying
countries, she appeared to care little about any other point than whether they were
cold or warm. Of the north and south poles, of the horrid ice which reigns there, and of
the increasing heat the farther one retires from them, she could give a very clear
account. When any one was travelling, she merely asked whether he was going
northward or southward, and strove to find his route in her little charts. Especially
when Wilhelm spoke of travelling, she was all attention, and seemed vexed when any
thing occurred to change the subject. Though she could not be prevailed upon to

undertake a part, or even to enter the theatre when any play was acting, yet she
willingly and zealously committed many odes and songs to memory; and by
unexpectedly, and, as it were, on the spur of the moment, reciting some such poem,
generally of the earnest and solemn kind, she would often cause astonishment in every
one.
Serlo, accustomed to regard with favor every trace of opening talent, encouraged her
in such performances; but what pleased him most in Mignon was her sprightly,
various, and often even mirthful, singing. By means of a similar gift, the harper likewise
had acquired his favor.
Without himself possessing genius for music, or playing on any instrument, Serlo could
rightly prize the value of the art: he failed not, as often as he could, to enjoy this
pleasure, which cannot be compared with any other. He held a concert once a week;
and now, with Mignon, the harper, and Laertes, who was not unskilful on the violin, he
had formed a very curious domestic band.
He was wont to say, "Men are so inclined to content themselves with what is
commonest; the spirit and the senses so easily grow dead to the impressions of the
beautiful and perfect,—that every one should study, by all methods, to nourish in his
mind the faculty of feeling these things. For no man can bear to be entirely deprived of
such enjoyments: it is only because they are not used to taste of what is excellent that
the generality of people take delight in silly and insipid things, provided they be new.
For this reason," he would add, "one ought, every day at least, to hear a little song,
read a good poem, see a fine picture, and, if it were possible, to speak a few
reasonable words." With such a turn of thought in Serlo, which in some degree was
natural to him, the persons who frequented his society could scarcely be in want of
pleasant conversation.
It was in the midst of these instructive entertainments, that Wilhelm one day received
a letter sealed in black. Werner's hand betokened mournful news; and our friend was
not a little shocked when, opening the sheet, he found it to contain the tidings of his
father's death, conveyed in a very few words. After a short and sudden illness, he had
parted from the world, leaving his domestic affairs in the best possible order.
This unlooked-for intelligence struck Wilhelm to the heart. He deeply felt how careless
and negligent we often are of friends and relations while they inhabit with us this
terrestrial sojourn; and how we first repent of our insensibility when the fair union, at

least for this side of time, is finally cut asunder. His grief for the early death of this
honest parent was mitigated only by the feeling that he had loved but little in the
world, and the conviction that he had enjoyed but little.
Wilhelm's thoughts soon turned to his own predicament, and he felt himself extremely
discomposed. A person can scarcely be put into a more dangerous position, than when
external circumstances have produced some striking change in his condition, without
his manner of feeling and of thinking having undergone any preparation for it. There is,
then, an epoch without epoch; and the contradiction which arises is the greater the
less the person feels that he is not trained for this new manner of existence.
Wilhelm saw himself in freedom, at a moment when he could not yet be at one with
himself. His thoughts were noble, his motives pure, his purposes were not to be
despised. All this he could, with some degree of confidence, acknowledge to himself:
but he had of late been frequently enough compelled to notice, that experience was
sadly wanting to him; and hence, on the experience of others, and on the results which
they deduced from it, he put a value far beyond its real one, and thus led himself still
deeper into error. What he wanted, he conceived he might most readily acquire if he
undertook to collect and retain whatever memorable thought he should meet with in
reading or in conversation. He accordingly recorded his own or other men's opinions,
nay, wrote whole dialogues, when they chanced to interest him. But unhappily by this
means he held fast the false no less firmly than the true; he dwelt far too long on one
idea, particularly when it was of an aphoristic shape; and thus he left his natural mode
of thought and action, and frequently took foreign lights for his loadstars. Aurelia's
bitterness, and Laertes's cold contempt for men, warped his judgment oftener than
they should have done: but no one, in his present case, would have been so dangerous
as Jarno, a man whose clear intellect could form a just and rigorous decision about
present things, but who erred, withal, in enunciating these particular decisions with a
kind of universal application; whereas, in truth, the judgments of the understanding
are properly of force but once, and that in the strictest cases, and become inaccurate
in some degree when applied to any other.
Thus Wilhelm, striving to become consistent with himself, was deviating farther and
farther from wholesome consistency; and this confusion made it easier for his passions
to employ their whole artillery against him, and thus still farther to perplex his views of
duty.

Serlo did not fail to take advantage of the late tidings; and in truth he daily had more
reason to be anxious about some fresh arrangement of his people. Either he must soon
renew his old contracts,—a measure he was not specially fond of; for several of his
actors, who reckoned themselves indispensable, were growing more and more
arrogant,—or else he must entirely new-model and re-form his company; which plan
he looked upon as preferable.
Though he did not personally importune our friend, he set Aurelia and Philina on him;
and the other wanderers, longing for some kind of settlement, on their side, gave
Wilhelm not a moment's rest; so that he stood hesitating in his choice, in no slight
embarrassment till he should decide. Who would have thought that a letter of
Werner's, written with quite different views, should have forced him on resolving? We
shall omit the introduction, and give the rest of it with little alteration.

CHAPTER II.
"It was, therefore, and it always must be, right for every one, on any opportunity, to
follow his vocation and exhibit his activity. Scarcely had the good old man been gone a
quarter of an hour, when every thing in the house began moving by a different plan
than his. Friends, acquaintances, relations, crowded forward, especially all sorts of
people who on such occasions use to gain any thing. They fetched and carried, they
counted, wrote, and reckoned; some brought wine and meat, others ate and drank;
and none seemed busier than the women getting out the mournings.
"Such being the case, thou wilt not blame me, that, in this emergency, I likewise
thought of my advantage. I made myself as active, and as helpful to thy sister, as I
could, and, so soon as it was any way decorous, signified to her that it had now
become our business to accelerate a union which our parents, in their too great
circumspection, had hitherto postponed.
"Do not suppose, however, that it came into our heads to take possession of that
monstrous empty house. We are more modest and more rational. Thou shalt hear our
plan: thy sister, so soon as we are married, comes to our house; and thy mother comes
along with her. 'How can that be?' thou wilt say: 'you have scarcely room for
yourselves in that hampered nest.' There lies the art of it, my friend. Good packing
renders all things possible: thou wouldst not believe what space one finds when one
desires to occupy but little. The large house we shall sell,—an opportunity occurs for
this; and the money we shall draw for it will produce a hundred-fold.
"I hope this meets thy views: I hope also thou hast not inherited the smallest particle
of those unprofitable tastes for which thy father and thy grandfather were noted. The
latter placed his greatest happiness in having about him a multitude of dull-looking
works of art, which no one, I may well say no one, could enjoy with him: the former
lived in a stately pomp, which he suffered no one to enjoy with him. We mean to
manage otherwise, and we expect thy approbation.
"It is true, I myself in all the house have no place whatever but the stool before my
writing-desk; and I see not clearly where they will be able to put a cradle down: but, in
return, the room we shall have out of doors will be the more abundant. Coffee-houses
and clubs for the husband, walks and drives for the wife, and pleasant country jaunts
for both. But the chief advantage in our plan is, that, the round table being now

completely filled, our father cannot ask his friends to dinner, who, the more he strove
to entertain them, used to laugh at him the more.
"Now no superfluity for us! Not too much furniture and apparatus; no coach, no
horses! Nothing but money, and the liberty, day after day, to do what you like in
reason. No wardrobe; still the best and newest on your back: the man may wear his
coat till it is done; the wife may truck her gown, the moment it is going out of fashion.
There is nothing so unsufferable to me as an old huckster's shop of property. If you
would offer me a jewel, on condition of my wearing it daily on my finger, I would not
accept it; for how can one conceive any pleasure in a dead capital? This, then, is my
confession of faith: To transact your business, to make money, to be merry with your
household; and about the rest of the earth to trouble yourself no farther than where
you can be of service to it.
"But ere now thou art saying, 'And, pray, what is to be done with me in this sage plan
of yours? Where shall I find shelter when you have sold my own house, and not the
smallest room remains in yours?'
"This is, in truth, the main point, brother; and in this, too, I shall have it in my power to
serve thee. But first I must present the just tribute of my praise for time so spent as
thine has been.
"Tell me, how hast thou within a few weeks become so skilled in every useful,
interesting object? Highly as I thought of thy powers, I did not reckon such attention
and such diligence among the number. Thy journal shows us with what profit thou art
travelling. The description of the iron and the copper forges is exquisite: it evinces a
complete knowledge of the subject. I myself was once there; but my relation,
compared with this, has but a very bungled look. The whole letter on the linen-trade is
full of information: the remarks on commercial competition are at once just and
striking. In one or two places, there are errors in addition, which indeed are very
pardonable.
"But what most delights my father and myself, is thy thorough knowledge of
husbandry, and the improvement of landed property. We have thoughts of purchasing
a large estate, at present under sequestration, in a very fruitful district. For paying it,
we mean to use the money realized by the sale of the house; another portion we shall
borrow; a portion may remain unpaid. And we count on thee for going thither, and
superintending the improvement of it; by which means, before many years are

passed, the land, to speak in moderation, will have risen above a third in value. We
shall then bring it to the market again, seek out a larger piece, improve and trade as
formerly. For all this thou art the man. Our pens, meanwhile, will not lie idle here; and
so by and by we shall rise to be enviable people.
"For the present, fare thee well! Enjoy life on thy journey, and turn thy face wherever
thou canst find contentment and advantage. For the next half-year we shall not need
thee; thou canst look about thee in the world as thou pleasest: a judicious person finds
his best instruction in his travels. Farewell! I rejoice at being connected with thee so
closely by relation, and now united with thee in the spirit of activity."

Well as this letter might be penned, and full of economical truths as it was, Wilhelm
felt displeased with it for more than one reason. The praise bestowed on him for his
pretended statistical, technological, and rural knowledge was a silent reprimand. The
ideal of the happiness of civic life, which his worthy brother sketched, by no means
charmed him: on the contrary, a secret spirit of contradiction dragged him forcibly the
other way. He convinced himself, that, except on the stage, he could nowhere find that
mental culture which he longed to give himself: he seemed to grow the more decided
in his resolution, the more strongly Werner, without knowing it, opposed him. Thus
assailed, he collected all his arguments together, and buttressed his opinions in his
mind the more carefully, the more desirable he reckoned it to show them in a
favorable light to Werner; and in this manner he produced an answer, which also we
insert.

CHAPTER III.
"Thy letter is so well written, and so prudently and wisely conceived, that no objection
can be made to it. Only thou must pardon me, when I declare that one may think,
maintain, and do directly the reverse, and yet be in the right as well as thou. Thy mode
of being and imagining appears to turn on boundless acquisition, and a light, mirthful
manner of enjoyment: I need scarcely tell thee, that in all this I find little that can
charm me.
"First, however, I am sorry to admit, that my journal is none of mine. Under the
pressure of necessity, and to satisfy my father, it was patched together by a friend's
help, out of many books: and though in words I know the objects it relates to, and
more of the like sort, I by no means understand them, or can occupy myself about
them. What good were it for me to manufacture perfect iron while my own breast is
full of dross? What would it stead me to put properties of land in order, while I am at
variance with myself?
"To speak it in a word, the cultivation of my individual self, here as I am, has from my
youth upwards been constantly though dimly my wish and my purpose. The same
intention I still cherish, but the means of realizing it are now grown somewhat clearer.
I have seen more of life than thou believest, and profited more by it also. Give some
attention, then, to what I say, though it should not altogether tally with thy own
opinions.
"Had I been a nobleman, our dispute would soon have been decided; but, being a
simple burgher, I must take a path of my own: and I fear it may be difficult to make
thee understand me. I know not how it is in foreign countries, but in Germany, a
universal, and, if I may say so, personal, cultivation is beyond the reach of any one
except a nobleman. A burgher may acquire merit; by excessive efforts he may even
educate his mind; but his personal qualities are lost, or worse than lost, let him
struggle as he will. Since the nobleman, frequenting the society of the most polished, is
compelled to give himself a polished manner; since this manner, neither door nor gate
being shut against him, grows at last an unconstrained one; since, in court or camp, his
figure, his person, are a part of his possessions, and, it may be, the most necessary
part,—he has reason enough to put some value on them, and to show that he puts
some. A certain stately grace in common things, a sort of gay elegance in earnest and
important ones, becomes him well; for it shows him to be everywhere in equilibrium.
He is a public person; and the more cultivated his movements, the more sonorous his

voice, the more staid and measured his whole being is, the more perfect is he. If to
high and low, to friends and relations, he continues still the same, then nothing can be
said against him, none may wish him otherwise. His coldness must be reckoned
clearness of head, his dissimulation prudence. If he can rule himself externally at every
moment of his life, no man has aught more to demand of him; and, whatever else
there may be in him or about him, capacities, talents, wealth, all seem gifts of
supererogation.
"Now, imagine any burgher offering ever to pretend to these advantages, he will
utterly fail, and the more completely, the greater inclination and the more
endowments nature may have given him for that mode of being.
"Since, in common life, the nobleman is hampered by no limits; since kings, or kinglike
figures, do not differ from him,—he can everywhere advance with a silent
consciousness, as if before his equals: everywhere he is entitled to press forward,
whereas nothing more beseems the burgher than the quiet feeling of the limits that
are drawn round him. The burgher may not ask himself, 'What art thou?' He can only
ask, 'What hast thou? What discernment, knowledge, talent, wealth?' If the nobleman,
merely by his personal carriage, offers all that can be asked of him, the burgher by his
personal carriage offers nothing, and can offer nothing. The former has a right
to seem: the latter is compelled to be, and what he aims at seeming becomes ludicrous
and tasteless. The former does and makes, the latter but effects and procures; he must
cultivate some single gifts in order to be useful; and it is beforehand settled, that, in his
manner of existence, there is no harmony, and can be none, since he is bound to make
himself of use in one department, and so has to relinquish all the others.
"Perhaps the reason of this difference is not the usurpation of the nobles, and the
submission of the burghers, but the constitution of society itself. Whether it will ever
alter, and how, is to me of small importance: my present business is to meet my own
case, as matters actually stand; to consider by what means I may save myself, and
reach the object which I cannot live in peace without.
"Now, this harmonious cultivation of my nature, which has been denied me by birth, is
exactly what I most long for. Since leaving thee, I have gained much by voluntary
practice: I have laid aside much of my wonted embarrassment, and can bear myself in
very tolerable style. My speech and voice I have likewise been attending to; and I may
say, without much vanity, that in society I do not cause displeasure. But I will not
conceal from thee, that my inclination to become a public person, and to please and

influence in a larger circle, is daily growing moreinsuperable. With this, there is
combined my love for poetry and all that is related to it; and the necessity I feel to
cultivate my mental faculties and tastes, that so, in this enjoyment henceforth
indispensable, I may esteem as good the good alone, as beautiful the beautiful alone.
Thou seest well, that for me all this is nowhere to be met with except upon the stage;
that in this element alone can I effect and cultivate myself according to my wishes. On
the boards a polished man appears in his splendor with personal accomplishments,
just as he does so in the upper classes of society; body and spirit must advance with
equal steps in all his studies; and there I shall have it in my power at once to be and
seem as well as anywhere. If I further long for solid occupations, we have there
mechanical vexations in abundance: I may give my patience daily exercise.
"Dispute not with me on this subject; for, ere thou writest, the step is taken. In
compliance with the ruling prejudices, I will change my name; as, indeed, that of
Meister, or Master, does not suit me. Farewell! Our fortune is in good hands: on that
subject I shall not disturb myself. What I need I will, as occasion calls, require from
thee: it will not be much, for I hope my art will be sufficient to maintain me."

Scarcely was the letter sent away, when our friend made good his words. To the great
surprise of Serlo and the rest, he at once declared that he was ready to become an
actor, and bind himself by a contract on reasonable terms. With regard to these they
were soon agreed; for Serlo had before made offers, with which Wilhelm and his
comrades had good reason to be satisfied. The whole of that unlucky company,
wherewith we have had so long to occupy ourselves, was now at once received; and,
except perhaps Laertes, not a member of it showed the smallest thankfulness to
Wilhelm. As they had entreated without confidence, so they accepted without
gratitude. Most of them preferred ascribing their appointment to the influence of
Philina, and directed their thanks to her. Meanwhile the contracts had been written
out, and were now a-signing. At the moment when our friend was subscribing his
assumed designation, by some inexplicable concatenation of ideas, there arose before
his mind's eye the image of that green in the forest where he lay wounded in Philina's
lap. The lovely Amazon came riding on her gray palfrey from the bushes of the wood:
she approached him and dismounted. Her humane anxiety made her come and go: at
length she stood before him. The white surtout fell down from her shoulders: her
countenance, her form, began to glance in radiance: and she vanished from his sight.

He wrote his name mechanically only, not knowing what he did, and felt not, till after
he had signed, that Mignon was standing at his side, was holding by his arm, and had
softly tried to stop him, and pull back his hand.

CHAPTER IV.
One of the conditions under which our friend had gone upon the stage was not
acceded to by Serlo without some limitations. Wilhelm had required that "Hamlet"
should be played entire and unmutilated: the other had agreed to this strange
stipulation, in so far as it was possible. On this point they had many a contest; for as to
what was possible or not possible, and what parts of the piece could be omitted
without mutilating it, the two were of very different opinions.
Wilhelm was still in that happy season when one cannot understand how, in the
woman one loves, in the writer one honors, there should be any thing defective. The
feeling they excite in us is so entire, so accordant with itself, that we cannot help
attributing the same perfect harmony to the objects themselves. Serlo again was
willing to discriminate, perhaps too willing: his acute understanding could usually
discern in any work of art nothing but a more or less imperfect whole. He thought, that
as pieces usually stood, there was little reason to be chary about meddling with them;
that of course Shakspeare, and particularly "Hamlet," would need to suffer much
curtailment.
But, when Serlo talked of separating the wheat from the chaff, Wilhelm would not
hear of it. "It is not chaff and wheat together," said he: "it is a trunk with boughs,
twigs, leaves, buds, blossoms, and fruit. Is not the one there with the others, and by
means of them?" To which Serlo would reply, that people did not bring a whole tree
upon the table; that the artist was required to present his guests with silver apples
in platters of silver. They exhausted their invention in similitudes, and their opinions
seemed still farther to diverge.
Our friend was on the borders of despair, when on one occasion, after much debating,
Serlo counselled him to take the simple plan,—to make a brief resolution, to grasp his
pen, to peruse the tragedy; dashing out whatever would not answer, compressing
several personages into one: and if he was not skilled in such proceedings, or had not
heart enough for going through with them, he might leave the task to him, the
manager, who would engage to make short work with it.
"That is not our bargain," answered Wilhelm. "How can you, with all your taste, show
so much levity?"

"My friend," cried Serlo, "you yourself will erelong feel it and show it. I know too well
how shocking such a mode of treating works is: perhaps it never was allowed on any
theatre till now. But where, indeed, was ever one so slighted as ours? Authors force us
on this wretched clipping system, and the public tolerates it. How many pieces have
we, pray, which do not overstep the measure of our numbers, of our decorations and
theatrical machinery, of the proper time, of the fit alternation of dialogue, and the
physical strength of the actor? And yet we are to play, and play, and constantly give
novelties. Ought we not to profit by our privilege, then, since we accomplish just as
much by mutilated works as by entire ones? It is the public itself that grants the
privilege. Few Germans, perhaps few men of any modern nation, have a proper sense
of an æsthetic whole:—they praise and blame by passages; they are charmed by
passages; and who has greater reason to rejoice at this than actors, since the stage is
ever but a patched and piece-work matter?"
"Is!" cried Wilhelm; "but must it ever be so? Must every thing that is continue?
Convince me not that you are right, for no power on earth should force me to abide by
any contract which I had concluded with the grossest misconceptions."
Serlo gave a merry turn to the business, and persuaded Wilhelm to review once more
the many conversations they had had together about "Hamlet," and himself to invent
some means of properly re-forming the piece.
After a few days, which he had spent alone, our friend returned with a cheerful look. "I
am much mistaken," cried he, "if I have not now discovered how the whole is to be
managed: nay, I am convinced that Shakspeare himself would have arranged it so, had
not his mind been too exclusively directed to the ruling interest, and perhaps misled by
the novels which furnished him with his materials."
"Let us hear," said Serlo, placing himself with an air of solemnity upon the sofa: "I will
listen calmly, but judge with rigor."
"I am not afraid of you," said Wilhelm: "only hear me. In the composition of this play,
after the most accurate investigation and the most mature reflection, I distinguish two
classes of objects. The first are the grand internal relations of the persons and events,
the powerful effects which arise from the characters and proceedings of the main
figures: these, I hold, are individually excellent; and the order in which they are
presented cannot be improved. No kind of interference must be suffered to destroy
them, or even essentially to change their form. These are the things which stamp

themselves deep into the soul, which all men long to see, which no one dares to
meddle with. Accordingly, I understand, they have almost wholly been retained in all
our German theatres. But our countrymen have erred, in my opinion, with regard to
the second class of objects, which may be observed in this tragedy: I allude to the
external relations of the persons, whereby they are brought from place to place, or
combined in various ways, by certain accidental incidents. These they have looked
upon as very unimportant; have spoken of them only in passing, or left them out
altogether. Now, indeed, it must be owned, these threads are slack and slender; yet
they run through the entire piece, and bind together much that would otherwise fall
asunder, and does actually fall asunder, when you cut them off, and imagine you have
done enough and more, if you have left the ends hanging.
"Among these external relations I include the disturbances in Norway, the war with
young Fortinbras, the embassy to his uncle, the settling of that feud, the march of
young Fortinbras to Poland, and his coming back at the end; of the same sort are
Horatio's return from Wittenberg, Hamlet's wish to go thither, the journey of Laertes
to France, his return, the despatch of Hamlet into England, his capture by pirates, the
death of the two courtiers by the letter which they carried. All these circumstances
and events would be very fit for expanding and lengthening a novel; but here they
injure exceedingly the unity of the piece, particularly as the hero has no plan, and are,
in consequence, entirely out of place."
"For once in the right!" cried Serlo.
"Do not interrupt me," answered Wilhelm: "perhaps you will not always think me right.
These errors are like temporary props of an edifice: they must not be removed till we
have built a firm wall in their stead. My project, therefore, is, not at all to change those
first-mentioned grand situations, or at least as much as possible to spare them, both
collectively and individually; but with respect to these external, single, dissipated, and
dissipating motives, to cast them all at once away, and substitute a solitary one instead
of them."
"And this?" inquired Serlo, springing up from his recumbent posture.
"It lies in the piece itself," answered Wilhelm, "only I employ it rightly. There are
disturbances in Norway. You shall hear my plan, and try it."

"After the death of Hamlet the father, the Norwegians, lately conquered, grow unruly.
The viceroy of that country sends his son, Horatio, an old school-friend of Hamlet's,
and distinguished above every other for his bravery and prudence, to Denmark, to
press forward the equipment of the fleet, which, under the new luxurious king,
proceeds but slowly. Horatio has known the former king, having fought in his battles,
having even stood in favor with him,—a circumstance by which the first ghost-scene
will be nothing injured. The new sovereign gives Horatio audience, and sends Laertes
into Norway with intelligence that the fleet will soon arrive; whilst Horatio is
commissioned to accelerate the preparation of it: and the Queen, on the other hand,
will not consent that Hamlet, as he wishes, should go to sea along with him."
"Heaven be praised!" cried Serlo: "we shall now get rid of Wittenberg and the
university, which was always a sorry piece of business. I think your idea extremely
good; for, except these two distant objects, Norway and the fleet, the spectator will
not be required to fancy any thing: the rest he will see; the rest takes place before him;
whereas, his imagination, on the other plan, was hunted over all the world."
"You easily perceive," said Wilhelm, "how I shall contrive to keep the other parts
together. When Hamlet tells Horatio of his uncle's crime, Horatio counsels him to go to
Norway in his company, to secure the affections of the army, and return in warlike
force. Hamlet also is becoming dangerous to the King and Queen; they find no readier
method of deliverance, than to send him in the fleet, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern to be spies upon him; and, as Laertes in the mean time comes from
France, they determine that this youth, exasperated even to murder, shall go after
him. Unfavorable winds detain the fleet: Hamlet returns; for his wandering through
the churchyard, perhaps some lucky motive may be thought of; his meeting with
Laertes in Ophelia's grave is a grand moment, which we must not part with. After this,
the King resolves that it is better to get quit of Hamlet on the spot: the festival of his
departure, the pretended reconcilement with Laertes, are now solemnized; on which
occasion knightly sports are held, and Laertes fights with Hamlet. Without the four
corpses, I cannot end the play: no one must survive. The right of popular election now
again comes in force; and Hamlet, while dying, gives his vote to Horatio."
"Quick! quick!" said Serlo, "sit down and work the play: your plan has my entire
approbation; only let not your zeal evaporate."

CHAPTER V.
Wilhelm had already been for some time busied with translating "Hamlet;" making
use, as he labored, of Wieland's spirited performance, through which he had first
become acquainted with Shakspeare. What had been omitted in Wieland's work he
replaced, and had secured a complete version, at the very time when Serlo and he
were pretty well agreed about the way of treating it. He now began, according to his
plan, to cut out and insert, to separate and unite, to alter, and often to restore; for,
satisfied as he was with his own conception, it still appeared to him as if, in executing
it, he were but spoiling the original.
When all was finished, he read his work to Serlo and the rest. They declared
themselves exceedingly contented with it: Serlo, in particular, made many flattering
observations.
"You have felt very justly," said he, among other things, "that some external
circumstances must accompany this play, but that they must be simpler than those
which the great poet has employed. What takes place without the theatre, what the
spectator does not see, but must imagine, is like a background, in front of which the
acting figures move. Your large and simple prospect of the fleet and Norway will do
much to improve the play; if this were altogether taken from it, we should have but a
family scene remaining; and the great idea, that here a kingly house, by internal crimes
and incongruities, goes down to ruin, would not be presented with its proper dignity.
But if the former background were left standing, so manifold, so fluctuating and
confused, it would hurt the impression of the figures."
Wilhelm again took Shakspeare's part; alleging that he wrote for islanders, for
Englishmen, who generally, in the distance, were accustomed to see little else than
ships and voyages, the coast of France and privateers; and thus what perplexed and
distracted others was to them quite natural.
Serlo assented; and both were of opinion, that, as the play was now to be produced
upon the German stage, this more serious and simple background was the best
adapted for the German mind.
The parts had been distributed before: Serlo undertook Polonius; Aurelia, Ophelia;
Laertes was already designated by his name; a young, thick-set, jolly new-comer was to
be Horatio; the King and Ghost alone occasioned some perplexity, for both of these no

one but Old Boisterous remaining. Serlo proposed to make the Pedant, King; but
against this our friend protested in the strongest terms. They could resolve on nothing.
Wilhelm had also allowed both Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to continue in his play.
"Why not compress them into one?" said Serlo. "This abbreviation will not cost you
much."
"Heaven keep me from all such curtailments!" answered Wilhelm: "they destroy at
once the sense and the effect. What these two persons are and do it is impossible to
represent by one. In such small matters we discover Shakspeare's greatness. These
soft approaches, this smirking and bowing, this assenting, wheedling, flattering, this
whisking agility, this wagging of the tail, this allness and emptiness, this legal knavery,
this ineptitude and insipidity,—how can they be expressed by a single man? There
ought to be at least a dozen of these people, if they could be had; for it is only in
society that they are any thing; they are society itself; and Shakspeare showed no little
wisdom and discernment in bringing in a pair of them. Besides, I need them as a couple
that may be contrasted with the single, noble, excellent Horatio."
"I understand you," answered Serlo, "and we can arrange it. One of them we shall
hand over to Elmira, Old Boisterous's eldest daughter: it will all be right, if they look
well enough; and I will deck and trim the puppets so that it shall be first-rate fun to
behold them."
Philina was rejoicing not a little, that she had to act the Duchess in the small
subordinate play. "I will show it so natural," cried she, "how you wed a second
husband, without loss of time, when you have loved the first immensely. I mean to win
the loudest plaudits, and every man shall wish to be the third."
Aurelia gave a frown: her spleen against Philina was increasing every day.
"'Tis a pity, I declare," said Serlo, "that we have no ballet; else you should dance me
a pas de deux with your first, and then another with your second husband,—and the
first might dance himself to sleep by the measure; and your bits of feet and ankles
would look so pretty, tripping to and fro upon the side stage."
"Of my ankles you do not know much," replied she pertly; "and as to my bits of feet,"
cried she, hastily reaching below the table, pulling off her slippers, and holding them

together out to Serlo, "here are the cases of them; and I challenge you to find me more
dainty ones."
"I was in earnest," said he, looking at the elegant half-shoes. "In truth, one does not
often meet with any thing so dainty."
They were of Parisian workmanship: Philina had received them as a present from the
countess, a lady whose foot was celebrated for its beauty.
"A charming thing!" cried Serlo: "my heart leaps at the sight of them."
"What gallant throbs!" replied Philina.
"There is nothing in the world beyond a pair of slippers," said he, "of such pretty
manufacture, in their proper time and place, when"—
Philina took her slippers from his hands, crying, "You have squeezed them all! They are
far too wide for me!" She played with them, and rubbed the soles of them together.
"How hot it is!" cried she, clapping the sole upon her cheek, then again rubbing, and
holding it to Serlo. He was innocent enough to stretch out his hand to feel the warmth.
"Clip! clap!" cried she, giving him a smart rap over the knuckles with the heel; so that
he screamed, and drew back his hand. "That's for indulging in thoughts of your own at
the sight of my slippers."
"And that's for using old folk like children," cried the other; then sprang up, seized her,
and plundered many a kiss, every one of which she artfully contested with a show of
serious reluctance. In this romping, her long hair got loose, and floated round the
group; the chair overset; and Aurelia, inwardly indignant at such rioting, arose in great
vexation.

CHAPTER VI.
Though in this remoulding of "Hamlet" many characters had been cut off, a sufficient
number of them still remained,—a number which the company was scarcely adequate
to meet.
"If this is the way of it," said Serlo, "our prompter himself must issue from his den, and
mount the stage, and become a personage like one of us."
"In his own station," answered Wilhelm, "I have frequently admired him."
"I do not think," said Serlo, "that there is in the world a more perfect artist of his kind.
No spectator ever hears him: we upon the stage catch every syllable. He has formed in
himself, as it were, a peculiar set of vocal organs for this purpose: he is like a Genius
that whispers intelligibly to us in the hour of need. He feels, as if by instinct, what
portion of his task an actor is completely master of, and anticipates from afar where
his memory will fail him. I have known cases in which I myself had scarcely read my
part: he said it over to me word for word, and I played happily. Yet he has some
peculiarities which would make another in his place quite useless. For example, he
takes such an interest in the plays, that, in giving any moving passage, he does not
indeed declaim it, but he reads it with all pomp and pathos. By this ill habit he has
nonplussed me on more than one occasion."
"As with another of his singularities," observed Aurelia, "he once left me sticking fast in
a very dangerous passage."
"How could this happen, with the man's attentiveness?" said Wilhelm.
"He is so affected," said Aurelia, "by certain passages, that he weeps warm tears, and
for a few moments loses all reflection; and it is not properly passages such as we
should call affecting that produce this impression on him; but, if I express myself
clearly, the beautiful passages, those out of which the pure spirit of the poet looks
forth, as it were, through open, sparkling eyes,—passages which others at most rejoice
over, and which many thousands altogether overlook."
"And with a soul so tender, why does he never venture on the stage?"
"A hoarse voice," said Serlo, "and a stiff carriage, exclude him from it; as his
melancholic temper excludes him from society. What trouble have I taken, and in vain,

to make him take to me! But he is a charming reader; such another I have never heard;
no one can observe like him the narrow limit between declamation and graceful
recital."
"The very man!" exclaimed our friend, "the very man! What a fortunate discovery! We
have now the proper hand for delivering the passage of 'The rugged Pyrrhus.'"
"One requires your eagerness," said Serlo, "before he can employ every object in the
use it was meant for."
"In truth," said Wilhelm, "I was very much afraid we should be obliged to leave this
passage out: the omission would have lamed the whole play."
"Well! That is what I cannot understand," observed Aurelia.
"I hope you will erelong be of my opinion," answered Wilhelm. "Shakspeare has
introduced these travelling players with a double purpose. The person who recites the
death of Priam with such feeling, in the first place, makes a deep impression on the
prince himself; he sharpens the conscience of the wavering youth: and, accordingly,
this scene becomes a prelude to that other, where, in the second place, the little play
produces such effect upon the King. Hamlet sees himself reproved and put to shame
by the player, who feels so deep a sympathy in foreign and fictitious woes; and the
thought of making an experiment upon the conscience of his stepfather is in
consequence suggested to him. What a royal monologue is that, which ends the
second act! How charming it will be to speak it!
"'Oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!Is it not monstrous that this player here,But
in a fiction, in a dream of passion,Could force his soul so to his own conceit,That, from
her working, all his visage wann'd;Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,A broken
voice, and his whole function suitingWith forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!For
Hecuba!What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,That he should weep for her?'"
"If we can but persuade our man to come upon the stage," observed Aurelia.
"We must lead him to it by degrees," said Serlo. "At the rehearsal he may read the
passage: we shall tell him that an actor whom we are expecting is to play it; and so, by
and by, we shall lead him nearer to the point."

Having agreed on this affair, the conversation next turned upon the Ghost. Wilhelm
could not bring himself to give the part of the living King to the Pedant, that so Old
Boisterous might play the Ghost: he was of opinion that they ought to wait a while;
because some other actors had announced themselves, and among these it was
probable they would find a fitter man.
We can easily conceive, then, how astonished Wilhelm must have been when,
returning home that evening, he found a billet lying on his table, sealed with singular
figures, and containing what follows:—
"Strange youth! we know thou art in great perplexity. For thy Hamlet thou canst hardly
find men enough, not to speak of ghosts. Thy zeal deserves a miracle: miracles we
cannot work, but somewhat marvellous shall happen. If thou have faith, the Ghost
shall arise at the proper hour! Be of courage and keep firm! This needs no answer: thy
determination will be known to us."
With this curious sheet he hastened back to Serlo, who read and re-read it, and at last
declared, with a thoughtful look, that it seemed a matter of some moment; that they
must consider well and seriously whether they could risk it. They talked the subject
over at some length; Aurelia was silent, only smiling now and then; and a few days
after, when speaking of the incident again, she gave our friend, not obscurely, to
understand that she held it all a joke of Serlo's. She desired him to cast away anxiety,
and to expect the Ghost with patience.
Serlo, for most part, was in excellent humor: the actors that were going to leave him
took all possible pains to play well, that their absence might be much regretted; and
this, combined with the new-fangled zeal of the others, gave promise of the best
results.
His intercourse with Wilhelm had not failed to exert some influence on him. He began
to speak more about art: for, after all, he was a German; and Germans like to give
themselves account of what they do. Wilhelm wrote down many of their
conversations; which, as our narrative must not be so often interrupted here, we shall
communicate to such of our readers as feel an interest in dramaturgic matters, by
some other opportunity.
In particular, one evening, the manager was very merry in speaking of the part of
Polonius, and how he meant to take it up. "I engage," said he, "on this occasion, to

present a very meritorious person in his best aspect. The repose and security of this
old gentleman, his emptiness and his significance, his exterior gracefulness and interior
meanness, his frankness and sycophancy, his sincere roguery and deceitful truth, I will
introduce with all due elegance in their fit proportions. This respectable, gray-haired,
enduring, time-serving half-knave, I will represent in the most courtly style: the
occasional roughness and coarseness of our author's strokes will further me here. I will
speak like a book when I am prepared beforehand, and like an ass when I utter the
overflowings of my heart. I will be insipid and absurd enough to chime in with every
one, and acute enough never to observe when people make a mock of me. I have
seldom taken up a part with so much zeal and roguishness."
"Could I but hope as much from mine!" exclaimed Aurelia. "I have neither youth nor
softness enough to be at home in this character. One thing alone I am too sure of,—
the feeling that turns Ophelia's brain, I shall not want."
"We must not take the matter up so strictly," said our friend. "For my share, I am
certain, that the wish to act the character of Hamlet has led me exceedingly astray,
throughout my study of the play. And now, the more I look into the part, the more
clearly do I see, that, in my whole form and physiognomy, there is not one feature
such as Shakspeare meant for Hamlet. When I consider with what nicety the various
circumstances are adapted to each other, I can scarcely hope to produce even a
tolerable effect."
"You are entering on your new career with becoming conscientiousness," said Serlo.
"The actor fits himself to his part as he can, and the part to him as it must. But how has
Shakspeare drawn his Hamlet? Is he so utterly unlike you?"
"In the first place," answered Wilhelm, "he is fair-haired."
"That I call far-fetched," observed Aurelia. "How do you infer that?"
"As a Dane, as a Northman, he is fair-haired and blue-eyed by descent."
"And you think Shakspeare had this in view?"
"I do not find it specially expressed; but, by comparison of passages, I think it
incontestable. The fencing tires him; the sweat is running from his brow; and the
Queen remarks, 'He's fat, and scant of breath.' Can you conceive him to be otherwise
than plump and fair-haired? Brown-complexioned people, in their youth, are seldom

plump. And does not his wavering melancholy, his soft lamenting, his irresolute
activity, accord with such a figure? From a dark-haired young man, you would look for
more decision and impetuosity."
"You are spoiling my imagination," cried Aurelia: "away with your fat Hamlets! Do not
set your well-fed prince before us! Give us rather any succedaneum that will move us,
will delight us. The intention of the author is of less importance to us than our own
enjoyment, and we need a charm that is adapted for us."

CHAPTER VII.
One evening a dispute arose among our friends about the novel and the drama, and
which of them deserved the preference. Serlo said it was a fruitless and misunderstood
debate: both might be superior in their kinds, only each must keep within the limits
proper to it.
"About their limits and their kinds," said Wilhelm, "I confess myself not altogether
clear."
"Who is so?" said the other; "and yet perhaps it were worth while to come a little
closer to the business."
They conversed together long upon the matter; and, in fine, the following was nearly
the result of their discussion:—
"In the novel as well as in the drama, it is human nature and human action that we see.
The difference between these sorts of fiction lies not merely in their outward form,—
not merely in the circumstance that the personages of the one are made to speak,
while those of the other have commonly their history narrated. Unfortunately many
dramas are but novels, which proceed by dialogue; and it would not be impossible to
write a drama in the shape of letters.
"But, in the novel, it is chiefly sentiments and events that are exhibited; in the drama, it
is characters and deeds. The novel must go slowly forward; and the sentiments of the
hero, by some means or another, must restrain the tendency of the whole to unfold
itself and to conclude. The drama, on the other hand, must hasten: and the character
of the hero must press forward to the end: it does not restrain, but is restrained. The
novel-hero must be suffering,—at least he must not in a high degree be active: in the
dramatic one, we look for activity and deeds. Grandison, Clarissa, Pamela, the Vicar of
Wakefield, Tom Jones himself, are, if not suffering, at least retarding, personages; and
the incidents are all in some sort modelled by their sentiments. In the drama the hero
models nothing by himself; all things withstand him; and he clears and casts away the
hinderances from off his path, or else sinks under them."
Our friends were also of opinion, that, in the novel, some degree of scope may be
allowed to Chance, but that it must always be led and guided by the sentiments of the
personages: on the other hand, that Fate, which, by means of outward, unconnected

circumstances, carries forward men, without their own concurrence, to an unforeseen
catastrophe, can have place only in the drama; that Chance may produce pathetic
situations, but never tragic ones; Fate, on the other hand, ought always to be
terrible,—and is, in the highest sense, tragic, when it brings into a ruinous
concatenation the guilty man, and the guiltless that was unconcerned with him.
These considerations led them back to the play of "Hamlet," and the peculiarities of its
composition. The hero in this case, it was observed, is endowed more properly with
sentiments than with a character: it is events alone that push him on, and accordingly
the play has in some measure the expansion of a novel. But as it is Fate that draws the
plan, as the story issues from a deed of terror, and the hero is continually driven
forward to a deed of terror, the work is tragic in the highest sense, and admits of no
other than a tragic end.
The book-rehearsal was now to take place, to which Wilhelm had looked forward as to
a festival. Having previously collated all the parts, no obstacle on this side could
oppose him. The whole of the actors were acquainted with the piece: he endeavored
to impress their minds with the importance of these book-rehearsals. "As you require,"
said he, "of every musical performer, that he shall, in some degree, be able to play
from the book: so every actor, every educated man, should train himself to recite from
the book, to catch immediately the character of any drama, any poem, any tale he may
be reading, and exhibit it with grace and readiness. No committing to memory will be
of service, if the actor have not, in the first place, penetrated into the sense and spirit
of his author: the mere letter will avail him nothing."
Serlo declared that he would overlook all subsequent rehearsals,—the last rehearsal
itself,—if justice were but done to these rehearsals from the book. "For, commonly,"
said he, "there is nothing more amusing than to hear an actor speak of study: it is as if
freemasons were to talk of building."
The rehearsal passed according to their wishes; and we may assert, that the fame and
favor which our company acquired afterwards had their foundation in these few but
well-spent hours.
"You did right, my friend," said Serlo, when they were alone, "in speaking to our
fellow-laborers so earnestly; and yet I am afraid they will scarcely fulfil your wishes."
"How so?" asked Wilhelm.

"I have noticed," answered Serlo, "that, as easily as you may set in motion the
imaginations of men, gladly as they listen to your tales and fictions, it is yet very
seldom that you find among them any touch of an imagination you can call productive.
In actors this remark is strikingly exemplified. Any one of them is well content to
undertake a beautiful, praiseworthy, brilliant part; and seldom will any one of them do
more than self-complacently transport himself into his hero's place, without in the
smallest troubling his head whether other people view him so or not. But to seize with
vivacity what the author's feeling was in writing; what portion of your individual
qualities you must cast off, in order to do justice to a part; how, by your own
conviction that you are become another man, you may carry with you the convictions
of the audience; how, by the inward truth of your conceptive power, you can change
these boards into a temple, this pasteboard into woods,—to seize and execute all this,
is given to very few. That internal strength of soul, by which alone deception can be
brought about; that lying truth, without which nothing will affect us rightly,—have, by
most men, never even been imagined.
"Let us not, then, press too hard for spirit and feeling in our friends. The surest way is
first coolly to instruct them in the sense and letter of the play,—if possible, to open
their understandings. Whoever has the talent will then, of his own accord, eagerly
adopt the spirited feeling and manner of expression; and those who have it not will at
least be prevented from acting or reciting altogether falsely. And among actors, as
indeed in all cases, there is no worse arrangement than for any one to make
pretensions to the spirit of a thing, while the sense and letter of it are not ready and
clear to him."

CHAPTER VIII.
Coming to the first stage-rehearsal very early, Wilhelm found himself alone upon the
boards. The appearance of the place surprised him, and awoke the strangest
recollections. A forest and village scene stood exactly represented as he once had seen
it in the theatre of his native town. On that occasion also, a rehearsal was proceeding;
and it was the morning when Mariana first confessed her love to him, and promised
him a happy interview. The peasants' cottages resembled one another on the two
stages, as they did in nature: the true morning sun, beaming through a half-closed
window-shutter, fell upon a part of a bench ill joined to a cottage door; but unhappily
it did not now enlighten Mariana's waist and bosom. He sat down, reflecting on this
strange coincidence: he almost thought that perhaps on this very spot he would soon
see her again. And, alas! the truth was nothing more, than that an afterpiece, to which
this scene belonged, was at that time very often played upon the German stage.
Out of these meditations he was roused by the other actors, along with whom two
amateurs, frequenters of the wardrobe and the stage, came in, and saluted Wilhelm
with a show of great enthusiasm. One of these was in some degree attached to Frau
Melina, but the other was entirely a lover of the art, and both were of the kind which a
good company should always wish to have about it. It was difficult to say whether their
love for the stage, or their knowledge of it, was the greater. They loved it too much to
know it perfectly: they knew it well enough to prize the good and to discard the bad.
But, their inclination being so powerful, they could tolerate the mediocre; and the
glorious joy which they experienced from the foretaste and the aftertaste of
excellence surpassed expression. The mechanical department gave them pleasure, the
intellectual charmed them; and so strong was their susceptibility, that even a
discontinuous rehearsal afforded them a species of illusion. Deficiencies appeared in
their eyes to fade away in distance: the successful touched them like an object near at
hand. In a word, they were judges such as every artist wishes in his own department.
Their favorite movement was from the side-scenes to the pit, and from the pit to the
side-scenes; their happiest place was in the wardrobe; their busiest employment was
in trying to improve the dress, position, recitation, gesture, of the actor; their liveliest
conversation was on the effect produced by him; their most constant effort was to
keep him accurate, active, and attentive, to do him service or kindness, and, without
squandering, to procure for the company a series of enjoyments. The two had
obtained the exclusive privilege of being present on the stage at rehearsals as well as
exhibitions. In regard to "Hamlet," they had not in all points agreed with Wilhelm: here

and there he had yielded; but, for most part, he had stood by his opinion: and, upon
the whole, these discussions had been very useful in the forming of his taste. He
showed both gentlemen how much he valued them; and they again predicted nothing
less, from these combined endeavors, than a new epoch for the German theatre.
The presence of these persons was of great service during the rehearsals. In particular
they labored to convince our players, that, throughout the whole of their preparations,
the posture and action, as they were intended ultimately to appear, should always be
combined with the words, and thus the whole be mechanically united by habit. In
rehearsing a tragedy especially, they said, no common movement with the hands
should be allowed: a tragic actor that took snuff in the rehearsal always frightened
them; for, in all probability, on coming to the same passage in the exhibition, he would
miss his pinch. Nay, on the same principles, they maintained that no one should
rehearse in boots, if his part were to be played in shoes. But nothing, they declared,
afflicted them so much as when the women, in rehearsing, stuck their hands into the
folds of their gowns.
By the persuasion of our friends, another very good effect was brought about: the
actors all began to learn the use of arms. Since military parts occur so frequently, said
they, can any thing look more absurd than men, without the smallest particle of
discipline, trolling about the stage in captains' and majors' uniforms?
Wilhelm and Laertes were the first that took lessons of a subaltern: they continued
their practising of fence with the greatest zeal.
Such pains did these two men take for perfecting a company which had so fortunately
come together. They were thus providing for the future satisfaction of the public, while
the public was usually laughing at their taste. People did not know what gratitude they
owed our friends, particularly for performing one service,—the service of frequently
impressing on the actor the fundamental point, that it was his duty to speak so loud as
to be heard. In this simple matter, they experienced more opposition and repugnance
than could have been expected. Most part maintained that they were heard well
enough already; some laid the blame upon the building; others said, one could not yell
and bellow, when one had to speak naturally, secretly, or tenderly.
Our two friends, having an immeasurable stock of patience, tried every means of
undoing this delusion, of getting round this obstinate self-will. They spared neither
arguments nor flatteries; and at last they reached their object, being aided not a little

by the good example of Wilhelm. By him they were requested to sit down in the
remotest corners of the house, and, every time they did not hear him perfectly, to rap
on the bench with a key. He articulated well, spoke out in a measured manner, raised
his tones gradually, and did not overcry himself in the most vehement passages. The
rapping of the key was heard less and less every new rehearsal: by and by the rest
submitted to the same operation, and at last it seemed rational to hope that the piece
would be heard by every one in all the nooks of the house.
From this example we may see how desirous people are to reach their object in their
own way; what need there often is of enforcing on them truths which are self-evident;
and how difficult it may be to reduce the man who aims at effecting something to
admit the primary conditions under which alone his enterprise is possible.

CHAPTER IX.
The necessary preparations for scenery and dresses, and whatever else was requisite,
were now proceeding. In regard to certain scenes and passages, our friend had whims
of his own, which Serlo humored, partly in consideration of their bargain, partly from
conviction, and because he hoped by these civilities to gain Wilhelm, and to lead him
according to his own purposes the more implicitly in time to come.
Thus, for example, the King and Queen were, at the first audience, to appear sitting on
the throne, with the courtiers at the sides, and Hamlet standing undistinguished in the
crowd. "Hamlet," said he, "must keep himself quiet: his sable dress will sufficiently
point him out. He should rather shun remark than seek it. Not till the audience is
ended, and the King speaks with him as with a son, should he advance, and allow the
scene to take its course."
A formidable obstacle still remained, in regard to the two pictures which Hamlet so
passionately refers to in the scene with his mother. "We ought," said Wilhelm, "to
have both of them visible, at full length, in the bottom of the chamber, near the main
door; and the former king must be clad in armor, like the Ghost, and hang at the side
where it enters. I could wish that the figure held its right hand in a commanding
attitude, were somewhat turned away, and, as it were, looked over its shoulder, that
so it might perfectly resemble the Ghost at the moment when he issues from the door.
It will produce a great effect, when at this instant Hamlet looks upon the Ghost, and
the Queen upon the picture. The stepfather may be painted in royal ornaments, but
not so striking."
There were several other points of this sort, about which we shall, perhaps, elsewhere
have opportunity to speak.
"Are you, then, inexorably bent on Hamlet's dying at the end?" inquired Serlo.
"How can I keep him alive," said Wilhelm, "when the whole play is pressing him to
death? We have already talked at large on that matter."
"But the public wishes him to live."
"I will show the public any other complaisance; but, as to this, I cannot. We often wish
that some gallant, useful man, who is dying of a chronical disease, might yet live
longer. The family weep, and conjure the physician; but he cannot stay him: and no

more than this physician can withstand the necessity of nature, can we give law to an
acknowledged necessity of art. It is a false compliance with the multitude, to raise in
them emotions which they wish, when these are not emotions which they ought, to
feel."
"Whoever pays the cash," said Serlo, "may require the ware according to his liking."
"Doubtless, in some degree," replied our friend; "but a great public should be
reverenced, not used as children are, when pedlers wish to hook the money from
them. By presenting excellence to the people, you should gradually excite in them a
taste and feeling for the excellent; and they will pay their money with double
satisfaction when reason itself has nothing to object against this outlay. The public you
may flatter, as you do a well-beloved child, to better, to enlighten, it; not as you do a
pampered child of quality, to perpetuate the error you profit from."
In this manner various other topics were discussed relating to the question, What
might still be changed in the play, and what must of necessity remain untouched? We
shall not enter farther on those points at present; but, perhaps, at some future time
we may submit this altered "Hamlet" itself to such of our readers as feel any interest in
the subject.

CHAPTER X.
The main rehearsal was at length concluded: it had lasted very long. Serlo and Wilhelm
still found much to care for: notwithstanding all the time which had already been
consumed in preparation, some highly necessary matters had been left to the very last
moment.
Thus, the pictures of the kings, for instance, were not ready: and the scene between
Hamlet and his mother, from which so powerful an effect was looked for, had a very
helpless aspect, as the business stood; for neither Ghost nor painted image of him was
at present forthcoming. Serlo made a jest of this perplexity: "We should be in a pretty
scrape," said he, "if the Ghost were to decline appearing, and the guard had nothing to
fight with but the air, and our prompter were obliged to speak the spirit's part from
the side-scenes."
"We will not scare away our strange friend by unbelief," said Wilhelm: "doubtless at
the proper season he will come, and astonish us as much as the spectators."
"Well, certainly," said Serlo, "I shall be a happy man to-morrow night, when once the
play will have been acted. It costs us more arrangement than I dreamed of."
"But none of you," exclaimed Philina, "will be happier than I, little as my part disturbs
me. Really, to hear a single subject talked of forever and forever, when, after all, there
is nothing to come of it beyond an exhibition, which will be forgotten like so many
hundred others, this is what I have not patience for. In Heaven's name, not so
many pros and cons! The guests you entertain have always something to object against
the dinner; nay, if you could hear them talk of it at home, they cannot understand how
it was possible to undergo so sad a business."
"Let me turn your illustration, pretty one, to my own advantage," answered Wilhelm.
"Consider how much must be done by art and nature, by traffickers and tradesmen,
before an entertainment can be given. How many years the stag must wander in the
forest, the fish in the river or the sea, before they can deserve to grace our table! And
what cares and consultations with her cooks and servants has the lady of the house
submitted to! Observe with what indifference the people swallow the production of
the distant vintager, the seaman, and the vintner, as if it were a thing of course. And
ought these men to cease from laboring, providing, and preparing; ought the master of
the house to cease from purchasing and laying up the fruit of their exertions,—

because at last the enjoyment it affords is transitory? But no enjoyment can be
transitory; the impression which it leaves is permanent: and what is done with
diligence and effort communicates to the spectator a hidden force, of which we cannot
say how far its influence may reach."
"'Tis all one to me," replied Philina: "only here again I must observe, that you men are
constantly at variance with yourselves. With all this conscientious horror at curtailing
Shakspeare, you have missed the finest thought there was in 'Hamlet'!"
"The finest?" cried our friend.
"Certainly the finest," said Philina: "the prince himself takes pleasure in it."
"And it is?" inquired Serlo.
"If you wore a wig," replied Philina, "I would pluck it very coolly off you; for I think you
need to have your understanding opened."
The rest began to think what she could mean: the conversation paused. The party
arose; it was now grown late; they seemed about to separate. While they were
standing in this undetermined mood, Philina all at once struck up a song, with a very
graceful, pleasing tune:—
"Sing me not with such emotion,How the night so lonesome is:Pretty maids, I've got a
notionIt is the reverse of this.
For as wife and man are plighted,And the better half the wife;So is night to day
united:Night's the better half of life.
Can you joy in bustling daytime,Day when none can get his will?It is good for work, for
haytime;For much other it is ill.
But when, in the nightly glooming,Social lamp on table glows,Face for faces dear
illuming,And such jest and joyance goes;
When the fiery, pert young fellow,Wont by day to run or ride,Whispering now some
tale would tell O,All so gentle by your side;
When the nightingale to loversLovingly her songlet sings,Which for exiles and sad
roversLike mere woe and wailing rings,—

With a heart how lightsome feeling,Do ye count the kindly clock,Which twelve times
deliberate pealing,Tells you none to-night shall knock!
Therefore, on all fit occasions,Mark it, maidens, what I sing:Every day its own
vexations,And the night its joys, will bring."
She made a slight courtesy on concluding, and Serlo gave a loud "Bravo!" She scuttled
off, and left the room with a teehee of laughter. They heard her singing and skipping as
she went down-stairs.
Serlo passed into another room: Wilhelm bade Aurelia good-night; but she continued
looking at him for a few moments, and said,—
"How I dislike that woman! Dislike her from my heart, and to her very slightest
qualities! Those brown eyelashes, with her fair hair, which our brother thinks so
charming, I cannot bear to look at; and that scar upon her brow has something in it so
repulsive, so low and base, that I could recoil ten paces every time I meet her. She was
lately telling as a joke, that her father, when she was a child, threw a plate at her head,
of which this is the mark. It is well that she is marked in the eyes and brow, that those
about her may be on their guard."
Wilhelm made no answer; and Aurelia went on, apparently with greater spleen,—
"It is next to impossible for me to speak a kind, civil word to her, so deeply do I hate
her, with all her wheedling. Would that we were rid of her! And you, too, my friend,
have a certain complaisance for the creature, a way of acting towards her, that grieves
me to the soul,—an attention which borders on respect; which, by Heaven! she does
not merit."
"Whatever she may be," replied our friend, "I owe her thanks. Her upbringing is to
blame: to her natural character I would do justice."
"Character!" exclaimed Aurelia; "and do you think such a creature has a character? O
you men! It is so like you! These are the women you deserve!"

"My friend, can you suspect me?" answered Wilhelm. "I will give account of every
minute I have spent beside her."

"Come, come," replied Aurelia: "it is late, we will not quarrel. All like each, and each
like all! Good-night, my friend! Good-night, my sparkling bird-of-paradise!"
Wilhelm asked how he had earned this title.
"Another time," cried she; "another time. They say it has no feet, but hovers in the air,
and lives on ether. That, however, is a story, a poetic fiction. Good-night! Dream
sweetly, if you are in luck!"
She proceeded to her room; and he, being left alone, made haste to his.
Half angrily he walked along his chamber to and fro. The jesting but decided tone of
Aurelia had hurt him: he felt deeply how unjust she was. Could he treat Philina with
unkindness or ill-nature? She had done no evil to him; but, for any love to her, he could
proudly and confidently take his conscience to witness that it was not so.
On the point of beginning to undress, he was going forward to his bed to draw aside
the curtains, when, not without extreme astonishment, he saw a pair of women's
slippers lying on the floor before it. One of them was resting on its sole, the other on
its edge. They were Philina's slippers: he recognized them but too well. He thought he
noticed some disorder in the curtains; nay, it seemed as if they moved. He stood, and
looked with unaverted eyes.
A new impulse, which he took for anger, cut his breath: after a short pause, he
recovered, and cried in a firm tone,—
"Come out, Philina! What do you mean by this? Where is your sense, your modesty?
Are we to be the speech of the house to-morrow?"
Nothing stirred.
"I do not jest," continued he: "these pranks are little to my taste."
No sound! No motion!
Irritated and determined, he at last went forward to the bed, and tore the curtains
asunder. "Arise," said he, "if I am not to give you up my room to-night."
With great surprise, he found his bed unoccupied; the sheets and pillows in the
sleekest rest. He looked around: he searched and searched, but found no traces of the

rouge. Behind the bed, the stove, the drawers, there was nothing to be seen: he
sought with great and greater diligence; a spiteful looker-on might have believed that
he was seeking in the hope of finding.
All thought of sleep was gone. He put the slippers on his table; went past it, up and
down; often paused before it; and a wicked sprite that watched him has asserted that
our friend employed himself for several hours about these dainty little shoes; that he
viewed them with a certain interest; that he handled them and played with them; and
it was not till towards morning that he threw himself on the bed, without undressing,
where he fell asleep amidst a world of curious fantasies.
He was still slumbering, when Serlo entered hastily. "Where are you?" cried he: "still in
bed? Impossible! I want you in the theatre: we have a thousand things to do."

CHAPTER XI.
The forenoon and the afternoon fled rapidly away. The playhouse was already full: our
friend hastened to dress. It was not with the joy which it had given him when he first
essayed it, that he now put on the garb of Hamlet: he only dressed that he might be in
readiness. On his joining the women in the stage-room, they unanimously cried that
nothing sat upon him right; the fine feather stood awry; the buckle of his belt did not
fit: they began to slit, to sew, and piece together. The music started: Philina still
objected somewhat to his ruff; Aurelia had much to say against his mantle. "Leave me
alone, good people," cried he: "this negligence will make me liker Hamlet." The women
would not let him go, but continued trimming him. The music ceased: the acting was
begun. He looked at himself in the glass, pressed his hat closer down upon his face,
and retouched the painting of his cheeks.
At this instant somebody came rushing in, and cried, "The Ghost! the Ghost!"
Wilhelm had not once had time all day to think of the Ghost, and whether it would
come or not. His anxiety on that head was at length removed, and now some strange
assistant was to be expected. The stage-manager came in, inquiring after various
matters: Wilhelm had not time to ask about the Ghost; he hastened to present himself
before the throne, where King and Queen, surrounded with their court, were already
glancing in all the splendors of royalty, and waiting till the scene in front of them
should be concluded. He caught the last words of Horatio, who was speaking of the
Ghost, in extreme confusion, and seemed to have almost forgotten his part.
The intermediate curtain went aloft, and Hamlet saw the crowded house before him.
Horatio, having spoken his address, and been dismissed by the King, pressed through
to Hamlet; and, as if presenting himself to the Prince, he said, "The Devil is in harness:
he has put us all in fright."
In the mean while, two men of large stature, in white cloaks and capouches, were
observed standing in the side-scenes. Our friend, in the distraction, embarrassment,
and hurry of the moment, had failed in the first soliloquy; at least, such was his own
opinion, though loud plaudits had attended his exit. Accordingly, he made his next
entrance in no pleasant mood, with the dreary wintry feeling of dramatic
condemnation. Yet he girded up his mind, and spoke that appropriate passage on the
"rouse and wassail," the "heavy-headed revel" of the Danes, with suitable indifference;
he had, like the audience, in thinking of it, quite forgotten the Ghost; and he started, in

real terror, when Horatio cried out, "Look, my lord! it comes!" He whirled violently
round; and the tall, noble figure, the low, inaudible tread, the light movement in the
heavy-looking armor, made such an impression on him, that he stood as if transformed
to stone, and could utter only in a half-voice his "Angels and ministers of grace defend
us!" He glared at the form, drew a deep breathing once or twice, and pronounced his
address to the Ghost in a manner so confused, so broken, so constrained, that the
highest art could not have hit the mark so well.
His translation of this passage now stood him in good stead. He had kept very close to
the original, in which the arrangement of the words appeared to him expressive of a
mind confounded, terrified, and seized with horror:—
"'Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin damn'd,Bring with thee airs from heaven, or
blasts from hell,Be thy intents wicked, or charitable,Thou com'st in such a questionable
shape,That I will speak to thee: I'll call thee Hamlet,King, father, royal Dane: oh, answer
me!'"
A deep effect was visible in the audience. The Ghost beckoned, the Prince followed
him amid the loudest plaudits.
The scene changed: and, when the two had re-appeared, the Ghost, on a sudden,
stopped, and turned round; by which means Hamlet came to be a little too close upon
it. With a longing curiosity, he looked in at the lowered visor; but except two deeplying eyes, and a well-formed nose, he could discern nothing. Gazing timidly, he stood
before the Ghost; but when the first tones issued from the helmet, and a somewhat
hoarse, yet deep and penetrating, voice, pronounced the words, "I am thy father's
spirit," Wilhelm, shuddering, started back some paces; and the audience shuddered
with him. Each imagined that he knew the voice: Wilhelm thought he noticed in it
some resemblance to his father's. These strange emotions and remembrances, the
curiosity he felt about discovering his secret friend, the anxiety about offending him,
even the theatric impropriety of coming too near him in the present situation, all this
affected Wilhelm with powerful and conflicting impulses. During the long speech of the
Ghost, he changed his place so frequently, he seemed so unsettled and perplexed, so
attentive and so absent-minded, that his acting caused a universal admiration, as the
Spirit caused a universal horror. The latter spoke with a feeling of melancholy anger,
rather than of sorrow; but of an anger spiritual, slow, and inexhaustible. It was the
mistemper of a noble soul, that is severed from all earthly things, and yet devoted to
unbounded woe. At last he vanished, but in a curious manner; for a thin, gray,

transparent gauze arose from the place of descent, like a vapor, spread itself over him,
and sank along with him.
Hamlet's friends now entered, and swore upon the sword. Old Truepenny, in the mean
time, was so busy under ground, that, wherever they might take their station, he was
sure to call out right beneath them, "Swear!" and they started, as if the soil had taken
fire below them, and hastened to another spot. On each of these occasions, too, a
little flame pierced through at the place where they were standing. The whole
produced on the spectators a profound impression.
After this, the play proceeded calmly on its course: nothing failed; all prospered; the
audience manifested their contentment, and the actors seemed to rise in heart and
spirits every scene.

CHAPTER XII.
The curtain fell, and rapturous applauses sounded out of every corner of the house.
The four princely corpses sprang aloft, and embraced each other. Polonius and Ophelia
likewise issued from their graves, and listened with extreme satisfaction, as Horatio,
who had stepped before the curtain to announce the following play, was welcomed
with the most thundering plaudits. The people would not hear of any other play, but
violently required the repetition of the present.
"We have won," cried Serlo, "and so not another reasonable word this night! Every
thing depends on the first impression: we should never take it ill of any actor, that, on
occasion of his first appearance, he is provident, and even self-willed."
The box-keeper came, and delivered him a heavy sum. "We have made a good
beginning," cried the manager, "and prejudice itself will now be on our side. But where
is the supper you promised us? To-night we may be allowed to relish it a little."
It had been agreed that all the party were to stay together in their stage-dresses, and
enjoy a little feast among themselves. Wilhelm had engaged to have the place in
readiness, and Frau Melina to provide the victuals.
A room, which commonly was occupied by scene-painters, had accordingly been
polished up as well as possible: our friends had hung it round with little decorations,
and so decked and trimmed it, that it looked half like a garden, half like a colonnade.
On entering it, the company were dazzled with the glitter of a multitude of lights,
which, across the vapors of the sweetest and most copious perfumes, spread a stately
splendor over a well-decorated and well-furnished table. These preparations were
hailed with joyful interjections by the party; all took their places with a certain genuine
dignity; it seemed as if some royal family had met together in the Kingdom of the
Shades. Wilhelm sat between Aurelia and the Frau Melina; Serlo between Philina and
Elmira; nobody was discontented with himself or with his place.
Our two theatric amateurs, who had from the first been present, now increased the
pleasure of the meeting. While the exhibition was proceeding, they had several times
stepped round, and come upon the stage, expressing, in the warmest terms, the
delight which they and the audience felt. They now descended to particulars, and each
was richly rewarded for his efforts.

With boundless animation, the company extolled man after man, and passage after
passage. To the prompter, who had modestly sat down at the bottom of the table,
they gave a liberal commendation for his "rugged Pyrrhus;" the fencing of Hamlet and
Laertes was beyond all praise; Ophelia's mourning had been inexpressibly exalted and
affecting; of Polonius they would not trust themselves to speak.
Every individual present heard himself commended through the rest and by them, nor
was the absent Ghost defrauded of his share of praise and admiration. He had played
the part, it was asserted, with a very happy voice, and in a lofty style; but what
surprised them most, was the information which he seemed to have about their own
affairs. He entirely resembled the painted figure, as if he had sat to the painter of it;
and the two amateurs described, in glowing language, how awful it had looked when
the spirit entered near the picture, and stepped across before his own image. Truth
and error, they declared, had been commingled in the strangest manner: they had felt
as if the Queen really did not see the Ghost. And Frau Melina was especially
commended, because on this occasion she had gazed upwards at the picture, while
Hamlet was pointing downwards at the Spectre.
Inquiry was now made how the apparition could have entered. The stage-manager
reported that a back-door, usually blocked up by decorations, had that evening, as the
Gothic hall was occupied, been opened; that two large figures in white cloaks and
hoods, one of whom was not to be distinguished from the other, had entered by this
passage; and by the same, it was likely, they had issued when the third act was over.
Serlo praised the Ghost for one merit,—that he had not whined and lamented like a
tailor; nay, to animate his son, had even introduced a passage at the end, which more
beseemed such a hero. Wilhelm had kept it in memory: he promised to insert it in his
manuscript.
Amid the pleasures of the entertainment, it had not been noticed that the children and
the harper were absent. Erelong they made their entrance, and were blithely
welcomed by the company. They came in together, very strangely decked: Felix was
beating a triangle, Mignon a tambourine; the old man had his large harp hung round
his neck, and was playing on it whilst he carried it before him. They marched round
and round the table, and sang a multitude of songs. Eatables were handed them; and
the guests seemed to think they could not do a greater kindness to the children, than
by giving them as much sweet wine as they chose to have. For the company
themselves had not by any means neglected a stock of savory flasks, presented by the

two amateurs, which had arrived that evening in baskets. The children tripped about,
and sang: Mignon, in particular, was frolicsome beyond all wont. She beat the
tambourine with the greatest liveliness and grace: now, with her finger pressed against
the parchment, she hummed across it swiftly to and fro; now rattled on it with her
knuckles, now with the back of her hand; nay, sometimes, with alternating rhythm, she
struck it first against her knee and then against her head; and anon twirling it in her
hand, she made the shells jingle by themselves; and thus, from the simplest
instrument, elicited a great variety of tones. After she and Felix had long rioted about,
they sat down upon an elbow-chair which was standing empty at the table, exactly
opposite to Wilhelm.
"Keep out of the chair!" cried Serlo: "it is waiting for the Ghost, I think; and, when he
comes, it will be worse for you."
"I do not fear him," answered Mignon: "if he come, we can rise. He is my uncle, and
will not harm me." To those who did not know that her reputed father had been
named the Great Devil, this speech was unintelligible.
The party looked at one another: they were more and more confirmed in their
suspicion that the manager was in the secret of the Ghost. They talked and tippled,
and the girls from time to time cast timid glances towards the door.
The children, who, sitting in the big chair, looked from over the table but like puppets
in their box, did actually at length start a little drama in the style of Punch. The
screeching tone of these people Mignon imitated very well; and Felix and she began to
knock their heads together, and against the edges of the table, in such a way as only
wooden puppets could endure. Mignon, in particular, grew frantic with gayety: the
company, much as they had laughed at her at first, were in fine obliged to curb her.
But persuasion was of small avail; for she now sprang up, and raved, and shook her
tambourine, and capered round the table. With her hair flying out behind her, with her
head thrown back, and her limbs, as it were, cast into the air, she seemed like one
of those antique Mænads, whose wild and all but impossible positions still, on classic
monuments, often strike us with amazement.
Incited by the talents and the uproar of the children, each endeavored to contribute
something to the entertainment of the night. The girls sung several canons; Laertes
whistled

in

the

manner

of

a

nightingale;

and

the

Pedant

gave

a

symphony pianissimo upon the Jew's-harp. Meanwhile the youths and damsels, who

sat near each other, had begun a great variety of games; in which, as the hands often
crossed and met, some pairs were favored with a transient squeeze, the emblem of a
hopeful kindness. Madam Melina in particular seemed scarcely to conceal a decided
tenderness for Wilhelm. It was late; and Aurelia, perhaps the only one retaining selfpossession in the party, now stood up, and signified that it was time to go.
By way of termination, Serlo gave a firework, or what resembled one; for he could
imitate the sound of crackers, rockets, and fire wheels, with his mouth, in a style of
nearly inconceivable correctness. You had only to shut your eyes, and the deception
was complete. In the mean time, they had all risen: the men gave their arms to the
women to escort them home. Wilhelm was walking last with Aurelia. The stagemanager met him on the stairs, and said to him, "Here is the veil our Ghost vanished
in; it was hanging fixed to the place where he sank; we found it this moment."—"A
curious relic!" said our friend, and took it with him.
At this instant his left arm was laid hold of, and he felt a smart twinge of pain in it.
Mignon had hid herself in the place: she had seized him, and bit his arm. She rushed
past him, down stairs, and disappeared.
On reaching the open air, almost all of them discovered that they had drunk too
liberally. They glided asunder without taking leave.
The instant Wilhelm gained his room, he stripped, and, extinguishing his candle,
hastened into bed. Sleep was overpowering him without delay, when a noise, that
seemed to issue from behind the stove, aroused him. In the eye of his heated fancy,
the image of the harnessed King was hovering there: he sat up that he might address
the Spectre; but he felt himself encircled with soft arms, and his mouth was shut with
kisses, which he had not force to push away.

CHAPTER XIII.
Next morning Wilhelm started up with an unpleasant feeling, and found himself alone.
His head was still dim with the tumult, which he had not yet entirely slept off; and the
recollection of his nightly visitant disquieted his mind. His first suspicion lighted on
Philina; but, on second thoughts, he conceived that it could not have been she. He
sprang out of bed: and, while putting on his clothes, he noticed that the door, which
commonly he used to bolt, was now ajar; though whether he had shut it on the
previous night, or not, he could not recollect.
But what surprised him most was the Spirit's veil, which he found lying on his bed.
Having brought it up with him, he had most probably thrown it there himself. It was a
gray gauze: on the hem of it he noticed an inscription broidered in dark letters. He
unfolded it, and read the words, "For the first and the last time! Flee, Youth! Flee!" He
was struck with it, and knew not what to think or say.
At this moment Mignon entered with his breakfast. The aspect of the child astonished
Wilhelm, we may almost say frightened him. She appeared to have grown taller over
night: she entered with a stately, noble air, and looked him in the face so earnestly,
that he could not endure her glances. She did not touch him, as at other times, when,
for morning salutation, she would press his hand, or kiss his cheek, his lips, his arm, or
shoulder; but, having put his things in order, she retired in silence.
The appointed time of a first rehearsal now arrived: our friends assembled, all of them
entirely out of tune from yesternight's debauch. Wilhelm roused himself as much as
possible, that he might not at the very outset violate the principles he had preached so
lately with such emphasis. His practice in the matter helped him through; for practice
and habit must, in every art, fill up the voids which genius and temper in their
fluctuations will so often leave.
But, in the present case, our friends had especial reason to admit the truth of the
remark, that no one should begin with a festivity any situation that is meant to last,
particularly that is meant to be a trade, a mode of living. Festivities are fit for what is
happily concluded: at the commencement, they but waste the force and zeal which
should inspire us in the struggle, and support us through a long-continued labor. Of all
festivities, the marriage festival appears the most unsuitable: calmness, humility, and
silent hope befit no ceremony more than this.

So passed the day, which to Wilhelm seemed the most insipid he had ever spent.
Instead of their accustomed conversation in the evening, the company began to yawn:
the interest of Hamlet was exhausted; they rather felt it disagreeable than otherwise
that the play was to be repeated next night. Wilhelm showed the veil which the royal
Dane had left: it was to be inferred from this, that he would not come again. Serlo was
of that opinion; he appeared to be deep in the secrets of the Ghost: but, on the other
hand, the inscription, "Flee, youth! Flee!" seemed inconsistent with the rest. How
could Serlo be in league with any one whose aim it was to take away the finest actor of
his troop?
It had now become a matter of necessity to confer on Boisterous the Ghost's part, and
on the Pedant that of the King. Both declared that they had studied these sufficiently:
nor was it wonderful; for in such a number of rehearsals, and so copious a treatment
of the subject, all of them had grown familiar with it: each could have exchanged his
part with any other. Yet they rehearsed a little here and there, and prepared the new
adventurers, as fully as the hurry would admit. When the company was breaking up at
a pretty late hour, Philina softly whispered Wilhelm as she passed, "I must have my
slippers back: thou wilt not bolt the door?" These words excited some perplexity in
Wilhelm, when he reached his chamber; they strengthened the suspicion that Philina
was the secret visitant: and we ourselves are forced to coincide with this idea;
particularly as the causes, which awakened in our friend another and a stranger
supposition, cannot be disclosed. He kept walking up and down his chamber in no
quiet frame: his door was actually not yet bolted.
On a sudden Mignon rushed into the room, laid hold of him, and cried, "Master! save
the house! It is on fire!" Wilhelm sprang through the door, and a strong smoke came
rushing down upon him from the upper story. On the street he heard the cry of fire;
and the harper, with his instrument in his hand, came down-stairs breathless through
the smoke. Aurelia hurried out of her chamber, and threw little Felix into Wilhelm's
arms.
"Save the child!" cried she, "and we will mind the rest."
Wilhelm did not look upon the danger as so great: his first thought was, to penetrate
to the source of the fire, and try to stifle it before it reached a head. He gave Felix to
the harper; commanding him to hasten down the stone stairs, which led across a little
garden-vault out into the garden, and to wait with the children in the open air. Mignon
took a light to show the way. He begged Aurelia to secure her things there also. He

himself pierced upwards through the smoke, but it was in vain that he exposed himself
to such danger. The flame appeared to issue from a neighboring house; it had already
caught the wooden floor and staircase: some others, who had hastened to his help,
were suffering like himself from fire and vapor. Yet he kept inciting them; he called for
water; he conjured them to dispute every inch with the flame, and promised to abide
by them to the last. At this instant, Mignon came springing up, and cried. "Master!
save thy Felix! The old man is mad! He is killing him." Scarcely knowing what he did,
Wilhelm darted down stairs; and Mignon followed close behind him.
On the last steps, which led into the garden-vault, he paused with horror. Some heaps
of fire-wood branches, and large masses of straw, which had been stowed in the place,
were burning with a clear flame; Felix was lying on the ground, and screaming; the
harper stood aside, holding down his head, and leaned against the wall. "Unhappy
creature! what is this?" said Wilhelm. The old man spoke not; Mignon lifted Felix, and
carried him with difficulty to the garden; while Wilhelm strove to pull the fire asunder
and extinguish it, but only by his efforts made the flame more violent. At last he, too,
was forced to flee into the garden, with his hair and his eyelashes burned; tearing the
harper with him through the conflagration, who, with singed beard, unwillingly
accompanied him.
Wilhelm hastened instantly to seek the children. He found them on the threshold of a
summer-house at some distance: Mignon was trying every effort to pacify her
comrade. Wilhelm took him on his knee: he questioned him, felt him, but could obtain
no satisfactory account from either him or Mignon.
Meanwhile, the fire had fiercely seized on several houses: it was now enlightening all
the neighborhood. Wilhelm looked at the child in the red glare of the flames: he could
find no wound, no blood, no hurt of any kind. He groped over all the little creature's
body, but the boy gave no sign of pain: on the contrary, he by degrees grew calm, and
began to wonder at the blazing houses, and express his pleasure at the spectacle of
beams and rafters burning all in order, like a grand illumination, so beautifully there.
Wilhelm thought not of the clothes or goods he might have lost: he felt deeply how
inestimable to him was this pair of human beings, who had just escaped so great a
danger. He pressed little Felix to his heart with a new emotion: Mignon, too, he was
about to clasp with joyful tenderness; but she softly avoided this: she took him by the
hand, and held it fast.

"Master," said she (till the present evening she had hardly ever named him master; at
first she used to name him sir, and afterwards to call him father),—"Master! we have
escaped an awful danger: thy Felix was on the point of death."
By many inquiries, Wilhelm learned from her at last, that, when they came into the
vault, the harper tore the light from her hand, and set on fire the straw. That he then
put Felix down, laid his hands with strange gestures on the head of the child, and drew
a knife as if he meant to sacrifice him. That she sprang forward, and snatched it from
him; that she screamed; and some one from the house, who was carrying something
down into the garden, came to her help, but must have gone away again in the
confusion, and left the old man and the child alone.
Two or even three houses were now flaming in a general blaze. Owing to the
conflagration in the vault, no person had been able to take shelter in the garden.
Wilhelm was distressed about his friends, and in a less degree about his property. Not
venturing to quit the children, he was forced to sit, and see the mischief spreading
more and more.
In this anxious state he passed some hours. Felix had fallen asleep on his bosom:
Mignon was lying at his side, and holding fast his hand. The efforts of the people finally
subdued the fire. The burned houses sank, with successive crashes, into heaps; the
morning was advancing; the children awoke, and complained of bitter cold; even
Wilhelm, in his light dress, could scarcely brook the chillness of the falling dew. He took
the young ones to the rubbish of the prostrate building, where, among the ashes and
the embers, they found a very grateful warmth.
The opening day collected, by degrees, the various individuals of the party. All of them
had got away unhurt: no one had lost much. Wilhelm's trunk was saved among the
rest.
Towards ten o'clock Serlo called them to rehearse their "Hamlet," at least some
scenes, in which fresh players were to act. He had some debates to manage, on this
point, with the municipal authorities. The clergy required, that, after such a visitation
of Providence, the playhouse should be shut for some time; and Serlo, on the other
hand, maintained, that both for the purpose of repairing the damage he had suffered,
and of exhilarating the depressed and terrified spirits of the people, nothing could be
more in place than the exhibition of some interesting play. His opinion in the end
prevailed, and the house was full. The actors played with singular fire, with more of a

passionate freedom than at first. The feelings of the audience had been heightened by
the horrors of the previous night, and their appetite for entertainment had been
sharpened by the tedium of a wasted and dissipated day: every one had more than
usual susceptibility for what was strange and moving. Most of them were new
spectators, invited by the fame of the play: they could not compare the present with
the preceding evening. Boisterous played altogether in the style of the unknown
Ghost: the Pedant, too, had accurately seized the manner of his predecessor; nor was
his own woful aspect without its use to him; for it seemed as if, in spite of his purple
cloak and his ermine collar, Hamlet were fully justified in calling him a "king of shreds
and patches."
Few have ever reached the throne by a path more singular than his had been. But
although the rest, and especially Philina, made sport of his preferment, he himself
signified that the count, a consummate judge, had at the first glance predicted this and
much more of him. Philina, on the other hand, recommended lowliness of mind to
him; saying, she would now and then powder the sleeves of his coat, that he might
remember that unhappy night in the castle, and wear his crown with meekness.

CHAPTER XIV.
Our friends had sought out other lodgings, on the spur of the moment, and were by
this means much dispersed. Wilhelm had conceived a liking for the garden-house,
where he had spent the night of the conflagration: he easily obtained the key, and
settled himself there. But Aurelia being greatly hampered in her new abode, he was
obliged to retain little Felix with him. Mignon, indeed, would not part with the boy.
He had placed the children in a neat chamber on the upper floor: he himself was in the
lower parlor. The young ones were asleep at this time: Wilhelm could not sleep.
Adjoining the lovely garden, which the full moon had just risen to illuminate, the black
ruins of the fire were visible; and here and there a streak of vapor was still mounting
from them. The air was soft, the night extremely beautiful. Philina, in issuing from the
theatre, had jogged him with her elbow, and whispered something to him, which he
did not understand. He felt perplexed and out of humor: he knew not what he should
expect or do. For a day or two Philina had avoided him: it was not till to-night that she
had given him any second signal. Unhappily the doors, that he was not to bolt, were
now consumed: the slippers had evaporated into smoke. How the girl would gain
admission to the garden, if her aim was such, he knew not. He wished she might not
come, and yet he longed to have some explanation with her.
But what lay heavier at his heart than this, was the fate of the harper, whom, since the
fire, no one had seen. Wilhelm was afraid, that, in clearing off the rubbish, they would
find him buried under it. Our friend had carefully concealed the suspicion which he
entertained, that it was the harper who had fired the house. The old man had been
first seen, as he rushed from the burning and smoking floor, and his desperation in the
vault appeared a natural consequence of such a deed. Yet, from the inquiry which the
magistrates had instituted touching the affair, it seemed likely that the fire had not
originated in the house where Wilhelm lived, but had accidentally been kindled in the
third from that, and had crept along beneath the roofs before it burst into activity.
Seated in a grove, our friend was meditating all these things, when he heard a low
footfall in a neighboring walk. By the melancholy song which arose along with it, he
recognized the harper. He caught the words of the song without difficulty: it turned on
the consolations of a miserable man, conscious of being on the borders of insanity.
Unhappily our friend forgot the whole of it except the last verse:—

"Wheresoe'er my steps may lead me,Meekly at the door I'll stay:Pious hands will come
to feed me,And I'll wander on my way.Each will feel a touch of gladnessWhen my aged
form appears:Each will shed a tear of sadness,Though I reck not of his tears."
So singing, he had reached the garden-door, which led into an unfrequented street.
Finding it bolted, he was making an attempt to climb the railing, when Wilhelm held
him back, and addressed some kindly words to him. The old man begged to have the
door unlocked, declaring that he would and must escape. Wilhelm represented to him
that he might indeed escape from the garden, but could not from the town; showing,
at the same time, what suspicions he must needs incur by such a step. But it was in
vain: the old man held by his opinion. Our friend, however, would not yield; and at last
he brought him, half by force, into the garden-house, in which he locked himself along
with him. The two carried on a strange conversation; which, however, not to afflict our
readers with repeating unconnected thoughts and dolorous emotions, we had rather
pass in silence than detail at large.

CHAPTER XV.
Undetermined what to do with this unhappy man, who displayed such indubitable
symptoms of madness, Wilhelm would have been in great perplexity, had not Laertes
come that very morning, and delivered him from his uncertainty. Laertes, as usual,
rambling everywhere about the town, had happened, in some coffee-house, to meet
with a man, who, a short time ago, had suffered under violent attacks of melancholy.
This person, it appeared, had been intrusted to the care of some country clergyman,
who made it his peculiar business to attend to people in such situations. In the present
instance, as in many others, his treatment had succeeded: he was still in town, and the
friends of the patient were showing him the greatest honor.
Wilhelm hastened to find out this person: he disclosed the case to him, and agreed
with him about the terms. The harper was to be brought over to him, under certain
pretexts. The separation deeply pained our friend; so used was he to see the man
beside him, and to hear his spirited and touching strains. The hope of soon beholding
him recovered, served, in some degree, to moderate this feeling. The old man's harp
had been destroyed in the burning of the house: they purchased him another, and
gave it him when he departed.
Mignon's little wardrobe had in like manner been consumed. As Wilhelm was about
providing her with new apparel, Aurelia proposed that now at last they should dress
her as a girl.
"No! no! not at all!" cried Mignon, and insisted on it with such earnestness, that they
let her have her way.
The company had not much leisure for reflection: the exhibitions followed close on
one another.
Wilhelm often mingled with the audience, to ascertain their feelings; but he seldom
heard a criticism of the kind he wished: more frequently the observations he listened
to distressed or angered him. Thus, for instance, shortly after "Hamlet" had been acted
for the first time, a youth was telling, with considerable animation, how happy he had
been that evening in the playhouse. Wilhelm hearkened, and was scandalized to learn
that his neighbor had, on that occasion, in contempt of those behind him, kept his hat
on, stubbornly refusing to remove it till the play was done; to which heroical
transaction he still looked back with great contentment.

Another gentleman declared that Wilhelm played Laertes very well, but that the actor
who had undertaken Hamlet did not seem too happy in his part. This permutation was
not quite unnatural; for Wilhelm and Laertes did resemble one another, though in a
very distant manner.
A third critic warmly praised his acting, particularly in the scene with his mother; only
he regretted much, that, in this fiery moment, a white strap had peered out from
below the Prince's waistcoat, whereby the illusion had been greatly marred.
Meanwhile, in the interior of the company, a multitude of alterations were occurring.
Philina, since the evening subsequent to that of the fire, had never given our friend the
smallest sign of closer intimacy. She had, as it seemed on purpose, hired a remote
lodging: she associated with Elmira, and came seldomer to Serlo,—an arrangement
very gratifying to Aurelia. Serlo continued still to like her, and often visited her
quarters, particularly when he hoped to find Elmira there. One evening he took
Wilhelm with him. At their entrance, both of them were much surprised to see Philina,
in the inner room, sitting in close contact with a young officer. He wore a red uniform
with white pantaloons; but, his face being turned away, they could not see it. Philina
came into the outer room to meet her visitors, and shut the door behind her. "You
surprise me in the middle of a very strange adventure," cried she.
"It does not appear so strange," said Serlo; "but let us see this handsome, young,
enviable gallant. You have us in such training, that we dare not show any jealousy,
however it may be."
"I must leave you to suspicion for a time," replied Philina in a jesting tone; "yet I can
assure you, the gallant is a lady of my friends, who wishes to remain a few days
undiscovered. You shall know her history in due season; nay, perhaps you shall even
behold the beautiful spinster in person; and then most probably I shall have need of all
my prudence and discretion, for it seems too likely that your new acquaintance will
drive your old friend out of favor."
Wilhelm stood as if transformed to stone. At the first glance, the red uniform had
reminded him of Mariana: the figure, too, was hers; the fair hair was hers; only the
present individual seemed to be a little taller.

"For Heaven's sake," cried he, "let us know something more about your friend! let us
see this lady in disguise! We are now partakers of your secret: we will promise, we will
swear; only let us see the lady!"
"What a fire he is in!" cried Philina: "but be cool, be calm; for to-day there will nothing
come of it."
"Let us only know her name!" cried Wilhelm.
"It were a fine secret, then," replied Philina.
"At least her first name!"
"If you can guess it, be it so. Three guesses I will give you,—not a fourth. You might
lead me through the whole calendar."
"Well!" said Wilhelm: "Cecilia, then?"
"None of your Cecilias!"
"Henrietta?"
"Not at all! Have a care, I pray you: guess better, or your curiosity will have to sleep
unsatisfied."
Wilhelm paused and shivered: he tried to speak, but the sound died away within him.
"Mariana?" stammered he at last, "Mariana?"
"Bravo!" cried Philina. "Hit to a hair's-breadth!" said she, whirling round upon her heel,
as she was wont on such occasions.
Wilhelm could not utter a word; and Serlo, not observing his emotion, urged Philina
more and more to let them in.
Conceive the astonishment of both, when Wilhelm, suddenly and vehemently
interrupting their raillery, threw himself at Philina's feet, and, with an air and tone of
the deepest passion, begged and conjured her, "Let me see the stranger," cried he:
"she is mine; she is my Mariana! She for whom I have longed all the days of my life, she
who is still more to me than all the women in this world! Go in to her at least, and tell
her that I am here,—that the man is here who linked to her his earliest love, and all the

happiness of his youth. Say that he will justify himself, though he left her so unkindly;
he will pray for pardon of her; and will grant her pardon, whatsoever she may have
done to him; he will even make no pretensions further, if he may but see her, if he may
but see that she is living and in happiness."
Philina shook her head, and said, "Speak low! Do not betray us! If the lady is indeed
your friend, her feelings must be spared; for she does not in the least suspect that you
are here. Quite a different sort of business brings her hither; and you know well
enough, one had rather see a spectre than a former lover at an inconvenient time. I
will ask her, and prepare her: we will then consider what is further to be done. Tomorrow I shall write you a note, saying when you are to come, or whether you may
come at all. Obey me punctually; for I protest, that, without her own and my consent,
no eye shall see this lovely creature. I shall keep my doors better bolted; and, with axe
and crow, you surely will not visit me."
Our friend conjured her, Serlo begged of her; but all in vain: they were obliged to yield,
and leave the chamber and the house.
With what feelings Wilhelm passed the night is easy to conceive. How slowly the hours
of the day flowed on, while he sat expecting a message from Philina, may also be
imagined. Unhappily he had to play that evening: such mental pain he had never
endured. The moment his part was done, he hastened to Philina's house, without
inquiring whether he had got her leave or not. He found her doors bolted: and the
people of the house informed him that mademoiselle had set out early in the morning,
in company with a young officer; that she had talked about returning shortly; but they
had not believed her, she having paid her debts, and taken every thing along with her.
This intelligence drove Wilhelm almost frantic. He hastened to Laertes, that he might
take measures for pursuing her, and, cost what it would, for attaining certainty
regarding her attendant. Laertes, however, represented to him the imprudence of such
passion and credulity. "I dare wager, after all," said he, "that it is no one else but
Friedrich. The boy is of a high family, I know; he is madly in love with Philina; it is likely
he has cozened from his friends a fresh supply of money, so that he can once more live
with her in peace for a while."
These considerations, though they did not quite convince our friend, sufficed to make
him waver. Laertes showed him how improbable the story was with which Philina had
amused them; reminded him how well the stranger's hair and figure answered

Friedrich; that with the start of him by twelve hours, they could not easily be
overtaken; and, what was more than all, that Serlo could not do without him at the
theatre.
By so many reasons, Wilhelm was at last persuaded to postpone the execution of his
project. That night Laertes got an active man, to whom they gave the charge of
following the runaways. It was a steady person, who had often officiated as courier
and guide to travelling-parties, and was at present without employment. They gave
him money, they informed him of the whole affair; instructing him to seek and
overtake the fugitives, to keep them in his eye, and instantly to send intelligence to
Wilhelm where and how he found them. That very hour he mounted horse, pursuing
this ambiguous pair; by which exertions, Wilhelm was in some degree at least,
composed.

CHAPTER XVI.
The departure of Philina did not make a deep sensation, either in the theatre or in the
public. She never was in earnest with any thing: the women universally detested her;
the men rather wished to see her selves-two than on the boards. Thus her fine, and,
for the stage, even happy, talents were of no avail to her. The other members of the
company took greater labor on them to supply her place: the Frau Melina, in
particular, was much distinguished by her diligence and zeal. She noted down, as
formerly, the principles of Wilhelm; she guided herself according to his theory and his
example; there was of late a something in her nature that rendered her more
interesting. She soon acquired an accurate mode of acting: she attained the natural
tone of conversation altogether, that of keen emotion she attained in some degree.
She contrived, moreover, to adapt herself to Serlo's humors: she took pains in singing
for his pleasure, and succeeded in that matter moderately well.
By the accession of some other players, the company was rendered more complete:
and while Wilhelm and Serlo were busied each in his degree, the former insisting on
the general tone and spirit of the whole, the latter faithfully elaborating the separate
passages, a laudable ardor likewise inspired the actors; and the public took a lively
interest in their concerns.
"We are on the right path," said Serlo once: "if we can continue thus, the public, too,
will soon be on it. Men are easily astonished and misled by wild and barbarous
exhibitions; yet lay before them any thing rational and polished, in an interesting
manner, and doubt not they will catch at it."
"What forms the chief defect of our German theatre, what prevents both actor and
spectator from obtaining proper views, is the vague and variegated nature of the
objects it contains. You nowhere find a barrier on which to prop your judgment. In my
opinion, it is far from an advantage to us that we have expanded our stage into, as it
were, a boundless arena for the whole of nature; yet neither manager nor actor need
attempt contracting it, until the taste of the nation shall itself mark out the proper
circle. Every good society submits to certain conditions and restrictions; so also must
every good theatre. Certain manners, certain modes of speech, certain objects, and
fashions of proceeding, must altogether be excluded. You do not grow poorer by
limiting your household expenditure."

On these points our friends were more or less accordant or at variance. The majority,
with Wilhelm at their head, were for the English theatre; Serlo and a few others for the
French.
It was also settled, that in vacant hours, of which unhappily an actor has too many,
they should in company peruse the finest plays in both these languages; examining
what parts of them seemed best and worthiest of imitation. They accordingly
commenced with some French pieces. On these occasions, it was soon observed,
Aurelia went away whenever they began to read. At first they supposed she had been
sick: Wilhelm once questioned her about it.
"I would not assist at such a reading," said she, "for how could I hear and judge, when
my heart was torn in pieces? I hate the French language from the bottom of my soul."
"How can you be hostile to a language," cried our friend, "to which we Germans are
indebted for the greater part of our accomplishments; to which we must become
indebted still more, if our natural qualities are ever to assume their proper form?"
"It is no prejudice!" replied Aurelia, "a painful impression, a hated recollection of my
faithless friend, has robbed me of all enjoyment in that beautiful and cultivated
tongue. How I hate it now with my whole strength and heart! During the period of our
kindliest connection, he wrote in German; and what genuine, powerful, cordial
German! It was not till he wanted to get quit of me that he began seriously to write in
French. I marked, I felt, what he meant. What he would have blushed to utter in his
mother tongue, he could by this means write with a quiet conscience. It is the
language of reservations, equivocations, and lies: it is a perfidious language. Heaven be
praised! I cannot find another word to express this perfide of theirs in all its compass.
Our poor treulos, the faithless of the English, are innocent as babes beside
it. Perfide means faithless with pleasure, with insolence and malice. How enviable is
the culture of a nation that can figure out so many shades of meaning by a single
word! French is exactly the language of the world,—worthy to become the universal
language, that all may have it in their power to cheat and cozen and betray each other!
His French letters were always smooth and pleasant, while you read them. If you chose
to believe it, they sounded warmly, even passionately; but, if you examined narrowly,
they were but phrases,—accursed phrases! He has spoiled my feeling to the whole
language, to French literature, even to the beautiful, delicious expressions of noble
souls which may be found in it. I shudder when a French word is spoken in my
hearing."

In such terms she could for hours continue to give utterance to her chagrin,
interrupting or disturbing every other kind of conversation. Sooner or later, Serlo used
to put an end to such peevish lamentations by some bitter sally; but by this means,
commonly, the talk for the evening was destroyed.
In all provinces of life, it is unhappily the case, that whatever is to be accomplished by
a number of co-operating men and circumstances cannot long continue perfect. Of an
acting company as well as of a kingdom, of a circle of friends as well as of an army, you
may commonly select the moment when it may be said that all was standing on the
highest pinnacle of harmony, perfection, contentment, and activity. But alterations will
ere long occur; the individuals that compose the body often change; new members are
added; the persons are no longer suited to the circumstances, or the circumstances to
the persons; what was formerly united quickly falls asunder. Thus it was with Serlo's
company. For a time you might have called it as complete as any German company
could ever boast of being. Most of the actors were occupying their proper places: all
had enough to do, and all did it willingly. Their private personal condition was not bad;
and each appeared to promise great things in his art, for each commenced with
animation and alacrity. But it soon became apparent that a part of them were mere
automatons, who could not reach beyond what was attainable without the aid of
feeling. Nor was it long till grudgings and envyings arose among them, such as
commonly obstruct every good arrangement, and easily distort and tear in pieces
every thing that reasonable and thinking men would wish to keep united.
The departure of Philina was not quite so insignificant as it had at first appeared. She
had always skilfully contrived to entertain the manager, and keep the others in good
humor. She had endured Aurelia's violence with amazing patience, and her dearest
task had been to flatter Wilhelm. Thus she was, in some respects, a bond of union for
the whole: the loss of her was quickly felt.
Serlo could not live without some little passion of the love sort. Elmira was of late
grown up, we might almost say grown beautiful; for some time she had been attracting
his attention: and Philina, with her usual dexterity, had favored this attachment so
soon as she observed it. "We should train ourselves in time," she would say, "to the
business of procuress: nothing else remains for us when we are old." Serlo and Elmira
had by this means so approximated to each other, that, shortly after the departure of
Philina, both were of a mind: and their small romance was rendered doubly
interesting, as they had to hide it sedulously from the father; Old Boisterous not

understanding jokes of that description. Elmira's sister had been admitted to the
secret; and Serlo was, in consequence, obliged to overlook a multitude of things in
both of them. One of their worst habits was an excessive love of junketing,—nay, if
you will, an intolerable gluttony. In this respect they altogether differed from Philina,
to whom it gave a new tint of loveliness, that she seemed, as it were, to live on air,
eating very little; and, for drink, merely skimming off, with all imaginable grace, the
foam from a glass of champagne.
Now, however, Serlo, if he meant to please his doxies, was obliged to join breakfast
with dinner; and with this, by a substantial bever, to connect the supper. But, amid
gormandizing, Serlo entertained another plan, which he longed to have fulfilled. He
imagined that he saw a kind of attachment between Wilhelm and Aurelia, and he
anxiously wished that it might assume a serious shape. He hoped to cast the whole
mechanical department of his theatrical economy on Wilhelm's shoulders; to find in
him, as in the former brother, a faithful and industrious tool. Already he had, by
degrees, shifted over to him most of the cares of management; Aurelia kept the
strong-box; and Serlo once more lived as he had done of old, entirely according to his
humor. Yet there was a circumstance which vexed him in secret, as it did his sister
likewise.
The world has a particular way of acting towards public persons of acknowledged
merit: it gradually begins to be indifferent to them, and to favor talents which are new,
though far inferior; it makes excessive requisitions of the former, and accepts of any
thing with approbation from the latter.
Serlo and Aurelia had opportunity enough to meditate on this peculiarity. The
strangers, especially the young and handsome ones, had drawn the whole attention
and applause upon themselves; and Serlo and his sister, in spite of the most zealous
efforts, had in general to make their exits without the welcome sound of clapping
hands. It is true, some special causes were at work on this occasion. Aurelia's pride was
palpable, and her contempt for the public was known to many. Serlo, indeed, flattered
every individual; but his cutting jibes against the whole were often circulated and
repeated. The new members, again, were not only strangers, unknown, and wanting
help, but some of them were likewise young and amiable: thus all of them found
patrons.
Erelong, too, there arose internal discontents, and many bickerings, among the actors.
Scarcely had they noticed that our friend was acting as director, when most of them

began to grow the more remiss, the more he strove to introduce a better order,
greater accuracy, and chiefly to insist that every thing mechanical should be performed
in the most strict and regular manner.
Thus, by and by, the whole concern, which actually for a time had nearly looked ideal,
grew as vulgar in its attributes as any mere itinerating theatre. And, unhappily, just as
Wilhelm, by his labor, diligence, and vigorous efforts, had made himself acquainted
with the requisitions of the art, and trained completely both his person and his habits
to comply with them, he began to feel, in melancholy hours, that this craft deserved
the necessary outlay of time and talents less than any other. The task was
burdensome, the recompense was small. He would rather have engaged with any
occupation in which, when the period of exertion is passed, one can enjoy repose of
mind, than with this, wherein, after undergoing much mechanical drudgery, the aim of
one's activity cannot still be attained but by the strongest effort of thought and
emotion. Besides, he had to listen to Aurelia's complaints about her brother's
wastefulness: he had to misconceive the winks and nods of Serlo, trying from afar to
lead him to a marriage with Aurelia. He had, withal, to hide his own secret sorrow,
which pressed heavy on his heart, because of that ambiguous officer whom he had
sent in quest of. The messenger returned not, sent no tidings; and Wilhelm feared that
his Mariana was lost to him a second time.
About this period, there occurred a public mourning, which obliged our friends to shut
their theatre for several weeks. Wilhelm seized this opportunity to pay a visit to the
clergyman with whom the harper had been placed to board. He found him in a
pleasant district; and the first thing that he noticed in the parsonage was the old man
teaching a boy to play upon his instrument. The harper showed great joy at sight of
Wilhelm: he rose, held out his hand, and said, "You see, I am still good for something in
the world; permit me to continue; for my hours are all distributed, and full of
business."
The clergyman saluted Wilhelm very kindly, and told him that the harper promised
well, already giving hopes of a complete recovery.
Their conversation naturally turned upon the various modes of treating the insane.
"Except physical derangements," observed the clergyman, "which often place
insuperable difficulties in the way, and in regard to which I follow the prescriptions of a
wise physician, the means of curing madness seem to me extremely simple. They are

the very means by which you hinder sane persons from becoming mad. Awaken their
activity; accustom them to order; bring them to perceive that they hold their being and
their fate in common with many millions; that extraordinary talents, the highest
happiness, the deepest misery, are but slight variations from the general lot: in this
way, no insanity will enter, or, if it has entered, will gradually disappear. I have
portioned out the old man's hours: he gives lessons to some children on the harp; he
works in the garden; he is already much more cheerful. He wishes to enjoy the
cabbages he plants: my son, to whom in case of death he has bequeathed his harp, he
is ardent to instruct, that the boy may be able to make use of his inheritance. I have
said but little to him, as a clergyman, about his wild, mysterious scruples; but a busy
life brings on so many incidents, that erelong he must feel how true it is, that doubt of
any kind can be removed by nothing but activity. I go softly to work: yet, if I could get
his beard and hood removed, I should reckon it a weighty point; for nothing more
exposes us to madness than distinguishing ourselves from others, and nothing more
contributes to maintain our common sense than living in the universal way with
multitudes of men. Alas! how much there is in education, in our social institutions, to
prepare us and our children for insanity!"
Wilhelm staid some days with this intelligent divine; heard from him many curious
narratives, not of the insane alone, but of persons such as commonly are reckoned
wise and rational, though they may have peculiarities which border on insanity.
The conversation became doubly animated, on the entrance of the doctor, with whom
it was a custom to pay frequent visits to his friend the clergyman, and to assist him in
his labors of humanity. The physician was an oldish man, who, though in weak health,
had spent many years in the practice of the noblest virtues. He was a strong advocate
for country life, being himself scarcely able to exist except in the open air. Withal, he
was extremely active and companionable. For several years he had shown a special
inclination to make friends with all the country clergymen within his reach. Such of
these as were employed in any useful occupation he strove by every means to help;
into others, who were still unsettled in their aims, he endeavored to infuse a taste for
some profitable species of exertion. Being at the same time in connection with a
multitude of noblemen, magistrates, judges, he had in the space of twenty years, in
secret, accomplished much towards the advancement of many branches of husbandry:
he had done his best to put in motion every project that seemed capable of benefiting
agriculture, animals, or men, and had thus forwarded improvement in its truest sense.
"For man," he used to say, "there is but one misfortune,—when some idea lays hold of

him, which exerts no influence upon active life, or, still more, which withdraws him
from it. At the present time," continued he, on this occasion, "I have such a case
before me: it concerns a rich and noble couple, and hitherto has baffled all my skill.
The affair belongs in part to your department, worthy pastor; and your friend here will
forbear to mention it again.
"In the absence of a certain nobleman, some persons of the house, in a frolic not
entirely commendable, disguised a young man in the master's clothes. The lady was to
be imposed upon by this deception; and, although it was described to me as nothing
but a joke, I am much afraid the purpose of it was to lead this noble and most amiable
lady from the path of honor. Her husband, however, unexpectedly returns; enters his
chamber; thinks he sees his spirit; and from that time falls into a melancholy temper,
firmly believing that his death is near.
"He has now abandoned himself to men who pamper him with religious ideas; and I
see not how he is to be prevented from going among the Hernhuters with his lady,
and, as he has no children, from depriving his relations of the chief part of his fortune."
"With his lady?" cried our friend in great agitation; for this story had frightened him
extremely.
"And, alas!" replied the doctor, who regarded Wilhelm's exclamation only as the voice
of common sympathy, "this lady is herself possessed with a deeper sorrow, which
renders a removal from the world desirable to her also. The same young man was
taking leave of her: she was not circumspect enough to hide a nascent inclination
towards him: the youth grew bolder, clasped her in his arms, and pressed a large
portrait of her husband, which was set with diamonds, forcibly against her breast. She
felt a sharp pain, which gradually went off, leaving first a little redness, then no trace
at all. As a man, I am convinced that she has nothing further to reproach herself with,
in this affair; as a physician, I am certain that this pressure could not have the smallest
ill effect. Yet she will not be persuaded that an induration is not taking place in the
part; and, if you try to overcome her notion by the evidence of feeling, she maintains,
that, though the evil is away this moment, it will return the next. She conceives that
the disease will end in cancer, and thus her youth and loveliness be altogether lost to
others and herself."
"Wretch that I am!" cried Wilhelm, striking his brow, and rushing from the company
into the fields. He had never felt himself in such a miserable case.

The clergyman and the physician were of course exceedingly astonished at this singular
discovery. In the evening all their skill was called for, when our friend returned, and,
with a circumstantial disclosure of the whole occurrence, uttered the most violent
accusations of himself. Both took interest in him: both felt a real concern about his
general condition, particularly as he painted it in the gloomy colors which arose from
the humor of the moment.
Next day the physician, without much entreaty, was prevailed upon to accompany him
in his return; both that he might bear him company, and that he might, if possible, do
something for Aurelia, whom our friend had left in rather dangerous circumstances.
In fact, they found her worse than they expected. She was afflicted with a sort of
intermittent fever, which could the less be mastered, as she purposely maintained and
aggravated the attacks of it. The stranger was not introduced as a physician: he
behaved with great courteousness and prudence. They conversed about her situation,
bodily and mental: her new friend related many anecdotes of persons who, in spite of
lingering disorders, had attained a good old age; adding, that, in such cases, nothing
could be more injurious than the intentional recalling of passionate and disagreeable
emotions. In particular he stated, that, for persons laboring under chronical and partly
incurable distempers, he had always found it a very happy circumstance when they
chanced to entertain, and cherish in their minds, true feelings of religion. This he
signified in the most unobtrusive manner, as it were historically; promising Aurelia at
the same time the reading of a very interesting manuscript, which he said he had
received from the hands of an excellent lady of his friends, who was now deceased.
"To me," he said, "it is of uncommon value; and I shall trust you even with the original.
Nothing but the title is in my hand-writing: I have called it, 'Confessions of a Fair
Saint.'"
Touching the medical and dietetic treatment of the racked and hapless patient, he also
left his best advice with Wilhelm. He then departed; promising to write, and, if
possible, to come again in person.
Meanwhile, in Wilhelm's absence, there had changes been preparing such as he was
not aware of. During his directorship, our friend had managed all things with a certain
liberality and freedom; looking chiefly at the main result. Whatever was required for
dresses, decorations, and the like, he had usually provided in a plentiful and handsome
style; and, for securing the co-operation of his people, he had flattered their selfinterest, since he could not reach them by nobler motives. In this he felt his conduct

justified the more; as Serlo for his own part never aimed at being a strict economist,
but liked to hear the beauty of his theatre commended, and was contented if Aurelia,
who conducted the domestic matters, on defraying all expenses, signified that she was
free from debt, and could besides afford the necessary sums for clearing off such
scores as Serlo in the interim, by lavish kindness to his mistresses or otherwise, might
have incurred.
Melina, who was charged with managing the wardrobe, had all the while been silently
considering these things, with the cold, spiteful temper peculiar to him. On occasion of
our friend's departure, and Aurelia's increasing sickness, he contrived to signify to
Serlo, that more money might be raised and less expended, and, consequently,
something be laid up, or at least a merrier life be led. Serlo hearkened gladly to such
allegations, and Melina risked the exhibition of his plan.
"I will not say," continued he, "that any of your actors has at present too much salary:
they are meritorious people, they would find a welcome anywhere; but, for the
income which they bring us in, they have too much. My project would be, to set up an
opera; and, as to what concerns the playhouse, I may be allowed to say it, you are the
person for maintaining that establishment upon your single strength. Observe how at
present your merits are neglected; and justice is refused you, not because your fellowactors are excellent, but merely good.
"Come out alone, as used to be the case; endeavor to attract around you middling, I
will even say inferior people, for a slender salary; regale the public with mechanical
displays, as you can so cleverly do; apply your remaining means to the opera, which I
am talking of; and you will quickly see, that, with the same labor and expense, you will
give greater satisfaction, while you draw incomparably more money than at present."
These observations were so flattering to Serlo, that they could not fail of making some
impression on him. He readily admitted, that, loving music as he did, he had long
wished for some arrangement such as this; though he could not but perceive that the
public taste would thus be still more widely led astray, and that with such a mongrel
theatre, not properly an opera, not properly a playhouse, any residue of true feeling
for regular and perfect works of art must shortly disappear.
Melina ridiculed, in terms more plain than delicate, our friend's pedantic notions in
this matter, and his vain attempts to form the public mind, instead of being formed by
it: Serlo and he at last agreed, with full conviction, that the sole concern was, how to

gather money, and grow rich, or live a joyous life; and they scarcely concealed their
wish to be delivered from those persons who at present hindered them. Melina took
occasion to lament Aurelia's weak health, and the speedy end which it threatened;
thinking all the while directly the reverse. Serlo affected to regret that Wilhelm could
not sing, thus signifying that his presence was by no means indispensable. Melina then
came forward with a whole catalogue of savings, which, he said, might be effected;
and Serlo saw in him his brother-in-law replaced threefold. They both felt that secrecy
was necessary in the matter, but this mutual obligation only joined them closer in their
interests. They failed not to converse together privately on every thing that happened;
to blame whatever Wilhelm or Aurelia undertook; and to elaborate their own project,
and prepare it more and more for execution.
Silent as they both might be about their plan, little as their words betrayed them, in
their conduct they were not so politic as constantly to hide their purposes. Melina now
opposed our friend in many points that lay within the province of the latter; and Serlo,
who had never acted smoothly to his sister, seemed to grow more bitter the more her
sickness deepened, the more her passionate and variable humors would have needed
toleration.
About this period they took up the "Emilie Galotti" of Lessing. The parts were very
happily distributed and filled: within the narrow circle of this tragedy, the company
found room for showing all the complex riches of their acting. Serlo, in the character of
Marinelli, was altogether in his place; Odoardo was very well exhibited; Madam Melina
played the Mother with considerable skill; Elmira gained distinction as Emilie; Laertes
made a stately Appiani; and Wilhelm had bestowed the study of some months upon
the Prince's part. On this occasion, both internally and with Aurelia and Serlo, he had
often come upon this question: What is the distinction between a noble and a wellbred manner? and how far must the former be included in the latter, though the latter
is not in the former?
Serlo, who himself in Marinelli had to act the courtier accurately, without caricature,
afforded him some valuable thoughts on this. "A well-bred carriage," he would say, is
difficult to imitate; for in strictness it is negative, and it implies a long-continued
previous training. You are not required to exhibit in your manner any thing that
specially betokens dignity; for, by this means, you are like to run into formality and
haughtiness: you are rather to avoid whatever is undignified and vulgar. You are never
to forget yourself; are to keep a constant watch upon yourself and others; to forgive

nothing that is faulty in your own conduct, in that of others neither to forgive too little
nor too much. Nothing must appear to touch you, nothing to agitate: you must never
overhaste yourself, must ever keep yourself composed, retaining still an outward
calmness, whatever storms may rage within. The noble character at certain moments
may resign himself to his emotions; the well-bred never. The latter is like a man
dressed out in fair and spotless clothes: he will not lean on any thing; every person will
beware of rubbing on him. He distinguishes himself from others, yet he may not stand
apart; for as in all arts, so in this, the hardest must at length be done with ease: the
well-bred man of rank, in spite of every separation, always seems united with the
people round him; he is never to be stiff or uncomplying; he is always to appear the
first, and never to insist on so appearing.
"It is clear, then, that, to seem well-bred, a man must actually be so. It is also clear why
women generally are more expert at taking up the air of breeding than the other sex;
why courtiers and soldiers catch it more easily than other men."
Wilhelm now despaired of doing justice to his part; but Serlo aided and encouraged
him, communicated the acutest observations on detached points, and furnished him
so well, that, on the exhibition of the piece, the public reckoned him a very proper
Prince.
Serlo had engaged to give him, when the play was over, such remarks as might occur
upon his acting: a disagreeable contention with Aurelia prevented any conversation of
that kind. Aurelia had acted the character of Orsina, in such a style as few have ever
done. She was well acquainted with the part, and during the rehearsals she had
treated it indifferently: but, in the exhibition of the piece, she had opened, as it were,
all the sluices of her personal sorrow; and the character was represented so as never
poet in the first glow of invention could have figured it. A boundless applause
rewarded her painful efforts; but her friends, on visiting her when the play was
finished, found her half fainting in her chair.
Serlo had already signified his anger at her overcharged acting, as he called it; at this
disclosure of her inmost heart before the public, to many individuals of which the
history of her fatal passion was more or less completely known. He had spoken bitterly
and fiercely; grinding with his teeth and stamping with his feet, as was his custom
when enraged. "Never mind her," cried he, when he saw her in the chair, surrounded
by the rest: "she will go upon the stage stark-naked one of these days, and then the
approbation will be perfect."

"Ungrateful, inhuman man!" exclaimed she: "soon shall I be carried naked to the place
where approbation or disapprobation can no longer reach our ears!" With these words
she started up, and hastened to the door. The maid had not yet brought her mantle;
the sedan was not in waiting; it had been raining lately; a cold, raw wind was blowing
through the streets. They endeavored to persuade her to remain, for she was very
warm. But in vain: she purposely walked slow; she praised the coolness, seemed to
inhale it with peculiar eagerness. No sooner was she home, than she became so hoarse
that she could hardly speak a word: she did not mention that there was a total
stiffness in her neck and along her back. Shortly afterwards a sort of palsy in the
tongue came on, so that she pronounced one word instead of another. They put her to
bed: by numerous and copious remedies, the evil changed its form, but was not
mastered. The fever gathered strength: her case was dangerous.
Next morning she enjoyed a quiet hour. She sent for Wilhelm, and delivered him a
letter. "This sheet," said she, "has long been waiting for the present moment. I feel
that my end is drawing nigh: promise me that you yourself will take this paper; that, by
a word or two, you will avenge my sorrows on the faithless man. He is not void of
feeling: my death will pain him for a moment."
Wilhelm took the letter; still endeavoring to console her, and to drive away the
thought of death.
"No," said she: "do not deprive me of my nearest hope. I have waited for him long: I
will joyfully clasp him when he comes."
Shortly after this the manuscript arrived which the physician had engaged to send her.
She called for Wilhelm,—made him read it to her. The effect which it produced upon
her, the reader will be better able to appreciate after looking at the following Book.
The violent and stubborn temper of our poor Aurelia was mollified by hearing it. She
took back the letter, and wrote another, as it seemed, in a meeker tone; charging
Wilhelm at the same time to console her friend, if he should be distressed about her
death; to assure him that she had forgiven him, and wished him every kind of
happiness.
From this time she was very quiet, and appeared to occupy herself with but a few
ideas, which she endeavored to extract and appropriate from the manuscript, out of
which she frequently made Wilhelm read to her. The decay of her strength was not

perceptible: nor had Wilhelm been anticipating the event, when one morning, as he
went to visit her, he found that she was dead.
Entertaining such respect for her as he had done, and accustomed as he was to live in
her society, the loss of her affected him with no common sorrow. She was the only
person that had truly wished him well: the coldness of Serlo he had felt of late but too
keenly. He hastened, therefore, to perform the service she had intrusted to him: he
wished to be absent for a time.
On the other hand, this journey was exceedingly convenient for Melina: in the course
of his extensive correspondence, he had lately entered upon terms with a male and a
female singer, who, it was intended, should, by their performances in interludes,
prepare the public for his future opera. The loss of Aurelia, and Wilhelm's absence,
were to be supplied in this manner; and our friend was satisfied with any thing that
could facilitate his setting out.
He had formed, within himself, a singular idea of the importance of his errand. The
death of his unhappy friend had moved him deeply; and, having seen her pass so early
from the scene, he could not but be hostilely inclined against the man who had
abridged her life, and made that shortened term so full of woe.
Notwithstanding the last mild words of the dying woman, he resolved, that, on
delivering his letter, he would pass a strict sentence on her faithless friend; and, not
wishing to depend upon the temper of the moment, he studied an address, which, in
the course of preparation, became more pathetic than just. Having fully convinced
himself of the good composition of his essay, he began committing it to memory, and
at the same time making ready for departure. Mignon was present as he packed his
articles: she asked him whether he intended travelling south or north; and, learning
that it was the latter, she replied, "Then, I will wait here for thee." She begged of him
the pearl necklace which had once been Mariana's. He could not refuse to gratify the
dear little creature, and he gave it her: the neckerchief she had already. On the other
hand, she put the veil of Hamlet's Ghost into his travelling-bag; though he told her it
could not be of any service to him.
Melina took upon him the directorship: his wife engaged to keep a mother's eye upon
the children, whom Wilhelm parted with unwillingly. Felix was very merry at the
setting out; and, when asked what pretty thing he wished to have brought back for
him, he said, "Hark you! bring me a papa!" Mignon seized the traveller's hand; then,

standing on her tiptoes, she pressed a warm and cordial, though not a tender, kiss,
upon his lips, and cried, "Master! forget us not, and come soon back."
And so we leave our friend, entering on his journey, amid a thousand different
thoughts and feelings; and here subjoin, by way of close, a little poem, which Mignon
had recited once or twice with great expressiveness, and which the hurry of so many
singular occurrences prevented us from inserting sooner:—
"Not speech, bid silence, I implore thee;For secrecy's my duty still:My heart entire I'd
fain lay bare before thee,But such is not of fate the will.
In season due the sun's course backward throwsDark night; ensue must light; the
mountain'sHard rock, at length, its bosom doth unclose,Now grudging earth no more
the hidden fountains.
Each seeks repose upon a friend's true breast,Where by laments he frees his bosom
lonely;Whereas an oath my lips hold closely pressed,The which to speech a God can
open only."—Editor's Version.

BOOK VI.
CONFESSIONS OF A FAIR SAINT.
Till my eighth year I was always a healthy child, but of that period I can recollect no
more than of the day when I was born. About the beginning of my eighth year, I was
seized with a hemorrhage; and from that moment my soul became all feeling, all
memory. The smallest circumstances of that accident are yet before my eyes as if they
had occurred but yesterday.
During the nine months which I then spent patiently upon a sick-bed, it appears to me
the groundwork of my whole turn of thought was laid; as the first means were then
afforded my mind of developing itself in its own manner.
I suffered and I loved: this was the peculiar form of my heart. In the most violent fits of
coughing, in the depressing pains of fever, I lay quiet, like a snail drawn back within its
house: the moment I obtained a respite, I wanted to enjoy something pleasant; and, as
every other pleasure was denied me, I endeavored to amuse myself with the innocent
delights of eye and ear. The people brought me dolls and picture-books, and whoever
would sit by my bed was obliged to tell me something.
From my mother I rejoiced to hear the Bible histories, and my father entertained me
with natural curiosities. He had a very pretty cabinet, from which he brought me first
one drawer and then another, as occasion served; showing me the articles, and
pointing out their properties. Dried plants and insects, with many kinds of anatomical
preparations, such as human skin, bones, mummies, and the like, were in succession
laid upon the sick-bed of the little one; the birds and animals he killed in hunting were
shown to me, before they passed into the kitchen; and, that the Prince of the World
might also have a voice in this assembly, my aunt related to me love-adventures out of
fairy-tales. All was accepted, all took root. There were hours in which I
vividlyconversed with the Invisible Power. I can still repeat some verses which I then
dictated, and my mother wrote down.
Often I would tell my father back again what I had learned from him. Rarely did I take
any physic without asking where the simples it was made of grew, what look they had,
what names they bore. Nor had the stories of my aunt lighted on stony ground. I
figured myself out in pretty clothes, and met the most delightful princes, who could
find no peace or rest till they discovered who the unknown beauty was. One adventure

of this kind, with a charming little angel dressed in white, with golden wings, who
warmly courted me, I dwelt upon so long, that my imagination painted out his form
almost to visibility.
After a year I was pretty well restored to health, but nothing of the giddiness of
childhood remained with me. I could not play with dolls: I longed for beings able to
return my love. Dogs, cats, and birds, of which my father kept a great variety, afforded
me delight; but what would I have given for such a creature as my aunt once told me
of! It was a lamb which a peasant-girl took up and nourished in a wood; but, in the
guise of this pretty beast, an enchanted prince was hid, who at length appeared in his
native shape, a lovely youth, and rewarded his benefactress by his hand. Such a lamb I
would have given the world for.
But there was none to be had; and, as every thing about me went on in such a quite
natural manner, I by degrees all but abandoned nearly all hopes of such a treasure.
Meanwhile I comforted myself by reading books in which the strangest incidents were
set forth. Among them all, my favorite was the "Christian German Hercules:" that
devout love-history was altogether in my way. Whenever any thing befell his dear
Valiska, and cruel things befell her, he always prayed before hastening to her aid; and
the prayers stood there verbatim. My longing after the Invisible, which I had always
dimly felt, was strengthened by such means; for, in short, it was ordained that God
should also be my confidant.
As I grew older I continued reading, Heaven knows what, in chaotic order. The "Roman
Octavia" was the book I liked beyond all others. The persecutions of the first Christians,
decorated with the charms of a romance, awoke the deepest interest in me.
But my mother now began to murmur at my constant reading; and, to humor her, my
father took away my books to-day, but gave them back to-morrow. She was wise
enough to see that nothing could be done in this way: she next insisted merely that my
Bible should be read with equal diligence. To this I was not disinclined, and I
accordingly perused the sacred volume with a lively interest. Withal my mother was
extremely careful that no books of a corruptive tendency should come into my hands:
immodest writings I would, of my own accord, have cast away; for my princes and my
princesses were all extremely virtuous.
To my mother, and my zeal for knowledge, it was owing, that, with all my love of
books, I also learned to cook; for much was to be seen in cookery. To cut up a hen, a

pig, was quite a feast for me. I used to bring the entrails to my father, and he talked
with me about them as if I had been a student of anatomy. With suppressed joy he
would often call me his misfashioned son.
I had passed my twelfth year. I learned French, dancing, and drawing: I received the
usual instructions in religion. In the latter, many thoughts and feelings were awakened,
but nothing properly relating to my own condition. I liked to hear the people speak of
God: I was proud that I could speak on these points better than my equals. I zealously
read many books which put me in a condition to talk about religion; but it never once
struck me to think how matters stood with me, whether my soul was formed according
to these holy precepts, whether it was like a glass from which the everlasting sun could
be reflected in its glancing. From the first I had presupposed all this.
My French I learned with eagerness. My teacher was a clever man. He was not a vain
empiric, not a dry grammarian: he had learning, he had seen the world. Instructing me
in language, he satisfied my zeal for knowledge in a thousand ways. I loved him so
much, that I used to wait his coming with a palpitating heart. Drawing was not hard for
me: I should have made greater progress had my teacher possessed head and science;
he had only hands and practice.
Dancing was at first one of my smallest amusements; my body was too sensitive for it;
I learned it only in the company of my sisters. But our dancing-master took a thought
of gathering all his scholars, male and female, and giving them a ball. This event gave
dancing quite another charm for me.
Amid a throng of boys and girls, the most remarkable were two sons of the marshal of
the court. The youngest was of my age; the other, two years older: they were children
of such beauty, that, according to the universal voice, no one had seen their like. For
my part, scarcely had I noticed them when I lost sight of all the other crowd. From that
moment I began to dance with care, and to wish that I could dance with grace. How
came it, on the other hand, that these two boys distinguished me from all the rest? No
matter: before an hour had passed we had become the warmest friends, and our little
entertainment did not end till we had fixed upon the time and place where we were
next to meet. What a joy for me! And how charmed was I next morning when both of
them inquired for my health, each in a gallant note, accompanied with a nosegay! I
have never since felt as I then did. Compliment was met by compliment: letter
answered letter. The church and the public-walks were grown a rendezvous; our young
acquaintances, in all their little parties, now invited us together; while, at the same

time, we were sly enough to veil the business from our parents, so that they saw no
more of it than we thought good.
Thus had I at once got a pair of lovers. I had yet decided upon neither: they both
pleased me, and we did extremely well together. All at once the eldest of the two fell
very sick. I myself had often been sick; and thus I was enabled, by rendering him many
little dainties and delicacies suited for a sick person, to afford some solace to the
sufferer. His parents thankfully acknowledged my attention: in compliance with the
prayer of their beloved son, they invited me, with all my sisters, to their house so soon
as he had arisen from his sick-bed. The tenderness which he displayed on meeting me
was not the feeling of a child: from that day I gave the preference to him. He warned
me to keep our secret from his brother; but the flame could no longer be concealed,
and the jealousy of the younger completed our romance. He played us a thousand
tricks: eager to annihilate our joys, he but increased the passion he was seeking to
destroy.
At last I had actually found the wished-for lamb, and this attachment acted on me like
my sickness: it made me calm, and drew me back from noisy pleasures. I was solitary, I
was moved; and thoughts of God again occurred to me. He was again my confidant;
and I well remember with what tears I often prayed for this poor boy, who still
continued sickly.
The more childishness there was in this adventure, the more did it contribute to the
forming of my heart. Our French teacher had now turned us from translating into daily
writing him some letter of our own invention. I brought my little history to market,
shrouded in the names of Phyllis and Damon. The old man soon saw through it, and, to
render me communicative, praised my labor very much. I still waxed bolder; came
openly out with the affair, adhering, even in the minute details, to truth. I do not now
remember what the passage was at which he took occasion to remark, "How pretty,
how natural, it is! But the good Phyllis had better have a care: the thing may soon grow
serious."
I felt vexed that he did not look upon the matter as already serious; and I asked him,
with an air of pique, what he meant by serious. I had not to repeat the question: he
explained himself so clearly, that I could scarcely hide my terror. Yet as anger came
along with it, as I took it ill that he should entertain such thoughts, I kept myself
composed: I tried to justify my nymph, and said, with glowing cheeks, "But, sir, Phyllis
is an honorable girl."

He was rogue enough to banter me about my honorable heroine. While we were
speaking French, he played upon the word honnête, and hunted the honorableness of
Phyllis over all its meanings. I felt the ridicule of this, and extremely puzzled. He, not to
frighten me, broke off, but afterwards often led the conversation to such topics. Plays,
and little histories, such as I was reading and translating with him, gave him frequent
opportunity to show how feeble a security against the calls of inclination our boasted
virtue was. I no longer contradicted him, but I was in secret scandalized; and his
remarks became a burden to me.
With my worthy Damon, too, I by degrees fell out of all connection. The chicanery of
the younger boy destroyed our intercourse. Soon after, both these blooming creatures
died. I lamented sore: however, in a short time, I forgot.
But Phyllis rapidly increased in stature, was altogether healthy, and began to see the
world. The hereditary prince now married, and a short time after, on his father's death,
began his rule. Court and town were in the liveliest motion: my curiosity had copious
nourishment. There were plays and balls, with all their usual accompaniments; and,
though my parents kept retired as much as possible, they were obliged to show
themselves at court, where I was of course introduced. Strangers were pouring in from
every side; high company was in every house; even tous some cavaliers were
recommended, others introduced; and, at my uncle's, men of every nation might be
met with.
My honest mentor still continued, in a modest and yet striking way, to warn me, and I
in secret to take it ill of him. With regard to his assertion, that women under every
circumstance were weak, I did not feel at all convinced; and here, perhaps, I was in the
right, and my mentor in the wrong: but he spoke so earnestly that once I grew afraid
he might be right, and said to him, with much vivacity, "Since the danger is so great,
and the human heart so weak, I will pray to God that he may keep me."
This simple answer seemed to please him, for he praised my purpose; but, on my side,
it was any thing but seriously meant. It was, in truth, but an empty word; for my
feelings towards the Invisible were almost totally extinguished. The hurry and the
crowd I lived in dissipated my attention, and carried me along as in a rapid stream.
These were the emptiest years of my life. All day long to speak of nothing, to have no
solid thought, never to do any thing but revel,—such was my employment. On my
beloved books I never once bestowed a thought. The people I lived among had not the

slightest tinge of literature or science: they were German courtiers, a class of men at
that time altogether destitute of culture.
Such society, it may be thought, must naturally have led me to the brink of ruin. I lived
away in mere corporeal cheerfulness: I never took myself to task, I never prayed, I
never thought about myself or God. Yet I look upon it as a providential guidance, that
none of these many handsome, rich, and well-dressed men could take my fancy. They
were rakes, and did not conceal it; this scared me back: they adorned their speech
with double meanings; this offended me, made me act with coldness towards them.
Many times their improprieties exceeded belief, and I did not restrain myself from
being rude.
Besides, my ancient counsellor had once in confidence contrived to tell me, that, with
the greater part of these lewd fellows, health, as well as virtue, was in danger. I now
shuddered at the sight of them: I was afraid if one of them in any way approached too
near me. I would not touch their cups or glasses,—even the chairs they had been
sitting on. Thus, morally and physically, I remained apart from them: all the
compliments they paid me I haughtily accepted, as incense that was due.
Among the strangers then resident among us was one young man peculiarly
distinguished, whom we used in sport to call Narciss. He had gained a reputation in the
diplomatic line; and, among the various changes now occurring at court, he was in
hopes of meeting with some advantageous place. He soon became acquainted with my
father: his acquirements and manners opened for him the way to a select society of
most accomplished men. My father often spoke in praise of him: his figure, which was
very handsome, would have made a still better impression, had it not been for
something of self-complacency which breathed from the whole carriage of the man. I
had seen him. I thought well of him; but we had never spoken.
At a great ball, where we chanced to be in company, I danced a minuet with him; but
this, too, passed without results. The more violent dances, in compliance with my
father, who felt anxious about my health, I was accustomed to avoid: in the present
case, when these came on, I retired to an adjoining room, and began to talk with
certain of my friends, elderly ladies, who had set themselves to cards.
Narciss, who had jigged it for a while, at last came into the room where I was; and
having got the better of a bleeding at the nose, which had overtaken him in dancing,
he began speaking with me about a multitude of things. In half an hour the talk had

grown so interesting, that neither of us could think of dancing any more. We were
rallied by our friends, but we did not let their bantering disturb us. Next evening we
recommenced our conversation, and were very careful not to hurt our health.
The acquaintance then was made. Narciss was often with my sisters and myself; and I
now once more began to reckon over and consider what I knew, what I thought of,
what I had felt, and what I could express myself about in conversation. My new friend
had mingled in the best society; besides the department of history and politics, with
every part of which he was familiar, he had gained extensive literary knowledge; there
was nothing new that issued from the press, especially in France, that he was
unacquainted with. He brought or sent me many a pleasant book, but this we had to
keep as secret as forbidden love. Learned women had been made ridiculous, nor were
well-informed women tolerated,—apparently because it would have been uncivil to
put so many ill-informed men to shame. Even my father, much as he delighted in this
new opportunity of cultivating my mind, expressly stipulated that our literary
commerce should remain secret.
Thus our intercourse continued for almost year and day; and still I could not say, that,
in any wise, Narciss had ever shown me aught of love or tenderness. He was always
complaisant and kind, but manifested nothing like attachment: on the contrary, he
even seemed to be in some degree affected by the charms of my youngest sister, who
was then extremely beautiful. In sport, he gave her many little friendly names out of
foreign tongues; for he could speak two or three of these extremely well, and loved to
mix their idiomatic phrases with his German. Such compliments she did not answer
very liberally; she was entangled in a different noose: and being very sharp, while he
was very sensitive, the two were often quarrelling about trifles. With my mother and
my aunt he kept on very pleasant terms; and thus, by gradual advances, he was grown
to be a member of the family.
Who knows how long we might have lived in this way, had not a curious accident
altered our relations all at once? My sisters and I were invited to a certain house, to
which we did not like to go. The company was too mixed; and persons of the stupidest,
if not the rudest, stamp were often to be met there. Narciss, on this occasion, was
invited also; and on his account I felt inclined to go, for I was sure of finding one, at
least, whom I could converse with as I desired. Even at table we had many things to
suffer, for several of the gentlemen had drunk too much: then, in the drawing-room,
they insisted on a game at forfeits. It went on with great vivacity and tumult. Narciss

had lost a forfeit: they ordered him, by way of penalty, to whisper something pleasant
in the ear of every member of the company. It seems he staid too long beside my next
neighbor, the lady of a captain. The latter on a sudden struck him such a box with his
fist, that the powder flew about me, into my eyes. When I had got my eyes cleared,
and in some degree recovered from my terror, I saw that both gentlemen had drawn
their swords. Narciss was bleeding; and the other, mad with wine and rage and
jealousy, could scarcely be held back by all the company. I seized Narciss, led him by
the arm up-stairs; and, as I did not think my friend safe even here from his frantic
enemy, I shut the door and bolted it.
Neither of us considered the wound serious, for a slight cut across the hand was all we
saw. Soon, however, I discovered that there was a stream of blood running down his
back, that there was a deep wound on the head. I now began to be afraid. I hastened
to the lobby, to get help: but I could see no person; every one had staid below to calm
the raving captain. At last a daughter of the family came skipping up: her mirth
annoyed me; she was like to die with laughing at the bedlam spectacle. I conjured her,
for the sake of Heaven, to get a surgeon; and she, in her wild way, sprang down-stairs
to fetch me one herself.
Returning to my wounded friend, I bound my handkerchief about his hand, and a
neckerchief, that was hanging on the door, about his head. He was still bleeding
copiously: he now grew pale, and seemed as if he were about to faint. There was none
at hand to aid me: I very freely put my arm round him, patted his cheek, and tried to
cheer him by little flatteries. It seemed to act on him like a spiritual remedy: he kept
his senses, but sat as pale as death.
At last the active housewife arrived: it is easy to conceive her terror when she saw my
friend in this predicament, lying in my arms, and both of us bestreamed with blood. No
one had supposed he was wounded: all imagined I had carried him away in safety.
Now smelling-bottles, wine, and every thing that could support and stimulate, were
copiously produced. The surgeon also came, and I might easily have been dispensed
with. Narciss, however, held me firmly by the hand: I would have staid without
holding. During the dressing of his wounds, I continued wetting his lips with wine: I
minded not, though all the company were now about us. The surgeon having finished,
his patient took a mute but tender leave of me, and was conducted home.

The mistress of the house now led me to her bedroom: she had to strip me altogether;
and I must confess, while they washed the blood from me, I saw with pleasure, for the
first time, in a mirror, that I might be reckoned beautiful without help of dress. No
portion of my clothes could be put on again; and, as the people of the house were all
either less or larger than myself, I was taken home in a strange disguise. My parents
were, of course, astonished. They felt exceedingly indignant at my fright, at the
wounds of their friend, at the captain's madness, at the whole occurrence. A very little
would have made my father send the captain a challenge, that he might avenge his
friend without delay. He blamed the gentlemen that had been there, because they had
not punished on the spot such a murderous attempt; for it was but too clear, that the
captain, instantly on striking, had drawn his sword, and wounded the other from
behind. The cut across the hand had been given just when Narciss himself was grasping
at his sword. I felt unspeakably affected, altered; or how shall I express it? The passion
which was sleeping at the deepest bottom of my heart had at once broken loose, like a
flame getting air. And if joy and pleasure are well suited for the first producing and the
silent nourishing of love, yet this passion, bold by nature, is most easily impelled by
terror to decide and to declare itself. My mother gave her little flurried daughter some
medicine, and made her go to bed. With the earliest morrow my father hastened to
Narciss, whom he found lying very sick of a wound-fever.
He told me little of what passed between them, but tried to quiet me about the
probable results of this event. They were now considering whether an apology should
be accepted, whether the affair should go before a court of justice, and many other
points of that description. I knew my father too well to doubt that he would be averse
to see the matter end without a duel: but I held my peace; for I had learned from him
before, that women should not meddle in such things. For the rest, it did not strike me
as if any thing had passed between the friends, in which my interests were specially
concerned; but my father soon communicated to my mother the purport of their
further conversation. Narciss, he said, appeared to be exceedingly affected at the help
afforded by me; had embraced him, declared himself my debtor forever, signified that
he desired no happiness except what he could share with me, and concluded by
entreating that he might presume to ask my hand. All this mamma repeated to me, but
subjoined the safe reflection, that, "as for what was said in the first agitation of mind
in such a case, there was little trust to be placed in it."—"Of course, none," I answered
with affected coldness; though all the while I was feeling, Heaven knows what.

Narciss continued sick for two months; owing to the wound in his right hand, he could
not even write. Yet, in the mean time, he showed me his regard by the most obliging
courtesies. All these unusual attentions I combined with what my mother had
disclosed to me, and constantly my head was full of fancies. The whole city talked of
the occurrence. With me they spoke of it in a peculiar tone: they drew inferences,
which, greatly as I struggled to avoid them, touched me very close. What had formerly
been habitude and trifling, was now grown seriousness andinclination. The anxiety in
which I lived was the more violent, the more carefully I studied to conceal it from
every one. The idea of losing him frightened me: the possibility of any closer union
made me tremble. For a half-prudent girl, there is really something awful in the
thought of marriage.
By such incessant agitations I was once more led to recollect myself. The gaudy
imagery of a thoughtless life, which used to hover day and night before my eyes, was
at once blown away. My soul again began to awaken, but the greatly interrupted
intimacy with my invisible friend was not so easy to renew. We still continued at a
frigid distance: it was again something, but little to the times of old.
A duel had been fought, and the captain severely wounded, before I ever heard of it.
The public feeling was, in all senses, strong on the side of my lover, who at length again
appeared upon the scene. But, first of all, he came, with his head tied up and his arm in
a sling, to visit us. How my heart beat while he was there! The whole family was
present: general thanks and compliments were all that passed on either side. Narciss,
however, found an opportunity to show some secret tokens of his love to me; by
which means my inquietude was but increased. After his recovery he visited us
throughout the winter on the former footing; and in spite of all the soft, private marks
of tenderness which he contrived to give me, the whole affair remained unsettled,
undiscussed.
In this manner was I kept in constant practice. I could trust my thoughts to no mortal,
and from God I was too far removed. Him I had quite forgotten those four wild years: I
now again began to think of him occasionally, but our acquaintance had grown cool;
they were visits of mere ceremony these; and as, moreover, in waiting on him, I used
to dress in fine apparel, to set before him self-complacently my virtue, honor, and
superiorities to others, he did not seem to notice me, or know me in that finery.
A courtier would have been exceedingly distressed, if the prince who held his fortune
in his hands had treated him in this way; but, for me, I did not sorrow at it. I had what I

required,—health and conveniences: if God should please to think of me, well; if not, I
reckoned I had done my duty.
This, in truth, I did not think at that period; yet it was the true figure of my soul. But, to
change and purify my feelings, preparations were already made.
The spring came on: Narciss once visited me unannounced, and at a time when I
happened to be quite alone. He now appeared in the character of lover, and asked me
if I could bestow on him my heart, and, so soon as he should obtain some lucrative and
honorable place, my hand along with it.
He had been received into our service; but at first they kept him back, and would not
rapidly promote him, because they dreaded his ambition. Having some little fortune of
his own, he was left with a slender salary.
Notwithstanding my regard for him, I knew that he was not a man to treat with
altogether frankly. I drew up, therefore, and referred him to my father. About my
father he did not seem to doubt, but wished first to be at one with me, now and here. I
at last said, Yes; but stipulated, as an indispensable condition, that my parents should
concur. He then spoke formally with both of them; they signified their satisfaction:
mutual promises were given, on the faith of his advancement, which it was expected
would be speedy. Sisters and aunts were informed of this arrangement, and the
strictest secrecy enjoined on them.
Thus had my lover become my bridegroom, and great was the difference between the
two. If one could change the lovers of all honorable maidens into bridegrooms, it
would be a kindness to our sex, even though marriage should not follow the
connection. The love between two persons does not lessen by the change, but it
becomes more reasonable. Innumerable little follies, all coquetries and caprices,
disappear. If the bridegroom tells us that we please him better in a morning-cap than
in the finest head-dress, no discreet young woman will disturb herself about her hairdressing; and nothing is more natural than that he, too, should think solidly, and rather
wish to form a housewife for himself than a gaudy doll for others. And thus it is in
every province of the business.
Should a young woman of this kind be fortunate enough to have a bridegroom who
possesses understanding and acquirements, she learns from him more than
universities and foreign lands can teach. She not only willingly receives instruction

when he offers it, but she endeavors to elicit more and more from him. Love makes
much that was impossible possible. By degrees, too, that subjection, so necessary and
so graceful for the female sex, begins: the bridegroom does not govern like the
husband; he only asks: but his mistress seeks to discover what he wants, and to offer it
before he asks it.
So did experience teach me what I would not for much have missed. I was happy, truly
happy as woman could be in the world,—that is to say, for a while.
Amid these quiet joys, a summer passed away. Narciss gave not the slightest reason to
complain of him: he daily became more dear to me; my whole soul was his. This he
well knew, and knew also how to prize it. Meanwhile, from seeming trifles, something
rose, which by and by grew hurtful to our union.
Narciss behaved to me as to a bride, and never dared to ask of me such favors as were
yet forbidden us. But, about the boundaries of virtue and decorum, we were of very
different opinions. I meant to walk securely, and so never granted him the smallest
freedom which the whole world might not have witnessed. He, used to dainties,
thought this diet very strict. On this point there was continual variance: he praised my
modesty, and sought to undermine my resolution.
The serious of my old French teacher now occurred to me, as well as the defence
which I had once suggested in regard to it.
With God I had again become a little more acquainted. He had given me a bridegroom
whom I loved, and for this I felt some thankfulness. Earthly love itself concentrated my
soul, and put its powers in motion: nor did it contradict my intercourse with God. I
naturally complained to him of what alarmed me, but I did not perceive that I myself
was wishing and desiring it. In my own eyes I was strong: I did not pray, "Lead us not
into temptation!" My thoughts were far beyond temptation. In this flimsy tinsel-work
of virtue I came to God. He did not drive me back. On the smallest movement towards
him, he left a soft impression in my soul; and this impression caused me always to
return.
Except Narciss, the world was altogether dead to me: excepting him, there was
nothing in it that had any charm. Even my love for dress was but the wish to please
him: if I knew that he was not to see me, I could spend no care upon it. I liked to
dance; but, if he was not beside me, it seemed as if I could not bear the motion. At a

brilliant festival, if he was not invited, I could neither take the trouble of providing new
things, nor of putting on the old according to the mode. To me they were alike
agreeable, or rather, I might say, alike burdensome. I used to reckon such an evening
very fairly spent when I could join myself to any ancient card-party, though formerly I
had not the smallest taste for such things; and, if some old acquaintance came and
rallied me about it, I would smile, perhaps for the first time all that night. So, likewise,
it was with promenades, and every social entertainment that can be imagined:—
"Him had I chosen from all others;His would I be, and not another's:To me his love was
all in all."
Thus was I often solitary in the midst of company, and real solitude was generally
acceptable to me. But my busy soul could neither sleep nor dream: I felt and thought,
and acquired by degrees some faculty to speak about my feelings and my thoughts
with God. Then were feelings of another sort unfolded, but these did not contradict
the former feelings: my affection to Narciss accorded with the universal scheme of
nature; it nowhere hindered the performance of a duty. They did not contradict each
other, yet they were immensely different. Narciss was the only living form which
hovered in my mind, and to which my love was all directed; but the other feeling was
not directed towards any form, and yet it was unspeakably agreeable. I no longer have
it: I no longer can impart it.
My lover, whom I used to trust with all my secrets, did not know of this. I soon
discovered that he thought far otherwise: he often gave me writings which opposed,
with light and heavy weapons, all that can be called connection with the Invisible. I
used to read the books because they came from him; but, at the end, I knew no word
of all that had been argued in them.
Nor, in regard to sciences and knowledge, was there want of contradiction in our
conduct. He did as all men do,—he mocked at learned women; and yet he kept
continually instructing me. He used to speak with me on all subjects, law excepted;
and, while constantly procuring books of every kind for me, he frequently repeated the
uncertain precept, "That a lady ought to keep the knowledge she might have more
secret than the Calvinist his creed in Catholic countries." And while I, by natural
consequence, endeavored not to show myself more wise or learned than formerly
before the world, Narciss himself was commonly the first who yielded to the vanity of
speaking about me and my superiorities.

A nobleman of high repute, and at that time valued for his influence, his talents, and
accomplishments, was living at our court with great applause. He bestowed especial
notice on Narciss, whom he kept continually about him. They once had an argument
about the virtue of women. Narciss repeated to me what had passed between them: I
was not wanting with my observations, and my friend required of me a written essay
on the subject. I could write French fluently enough: I had laid a good foundation with
my teacher. My correspondence with Narciss was likewise carried on in French: except
in French books, there was then no elegant instruction to be had. My essay pleased
the count: I was obliged to let him have some little songs, which I had lately been
composing. In short, Narciss appeared to revel without stint in the renown of his
beloved: and the story, to his great contentment, ended with a French epistle in heroic
verse, which the count transmitted to him on departing; in which their argument was
mentioned, and my friend reminded of his happiness in being destined, after all his
doubts and errors, to learn most certainly what virtue was, in the arms of a virtuous
and charming wife.
He showed this poem first of all to me, and then to almost every one; each thinking of
the matter what he pleased. Thus did he act in several cases: every stranger, whom he
valued, must be made acquainted in our house.
A noble family was staying for a season in the place, to profit by the skill of our
physician. In this house, too, Narciss was looked on as a son; he introduced me there;
we found among these worthy persons the most pleasant entertainment for mind and
heart. Even the common pastimes of society appeared less empty here than
elsewhere. All knew how matters stood with us: they treated us as circumstances
would allow, and left the main relation unalluded to. I mention this one family;
because, in the after-period of my life, it had a powerful influence upon me.
Almost a year of our connection had elapsed; and, along with it, our spring was over.
The summer came, and all grew drier and more earnest.
By several unexpected deaths, some offices fell vacant, which Narciss might make
pretensions to. The instant was at hand when my whole destiny must be decided; and
while Narciss, and all our friends, were making every effort to efface some impressions
which obstructed him at court, and to obtain for him the wished-for situation, I turned
with my request to my Invisible Friend. I was received so kindly, that I gladly came
again. I confessed, without disguise, my wish that Narciss might obtain the place; but

my prayer was not importunate, and I did not require that it should happen for the
sake of my petition.
The place was obtained by a far inferior competitor. I was dreadfully troubled at this
news: I hastened to my room, the door of which I locked behind me. The first fit of
grief went off in a shower of tears: the next thought was, "Yet it was not by chance
that it happened;" and instantly I formed the resolution to be well content with it,
seeing even this apparent evil would be for my true advantage. The softest emotions
then pressed in upon me, and divided all the clouds of sorrow. I felt, that, with help
like this, there was nothing one might not endure. At dinner I appeared quite cheerful,
to the great astonishment of all the house.
Narciss had less internal force than I, and I was called upon to comfort him. In his
family, too, he had many crosses to encounter, some of which afflicted him
considerably; and, such true confidence subsisting between us, he intrusted me with
all. His negotiations for entering on foreign service were not more fortunate; all this I
felt deeply on his account and mine; all this, too, I ultimately carried to the place
where my petitions had already been so well received.
The softer these experiences were, the oftener did I endeavor to renew them: I hoped
continually to meet with comfort where I had so often met with it. Yet I did not always
meet with it: I was as one that goes to warm him in the sunshine, while there is
something standing in the way that makes a shadow. "What is this?" I asked myself. I
traced the matter zealously, and soon perceived that it all depended on the situation
of my soul: if this was not turned in the straightest direction towards God, I still
continued cold; I did not feel his counter-influence; I could obtain no answer. The
second question was, "What hinders this direction?" Here I was in a wide field: I
perplexed myself in an inquiry which lasted nearly all the second year of my
attachment to Narciss. I might have ended the investigation sooner, for it was not long
till I had got upon the proper trace; but I would not confess it, and I sought a thousand
outlets.
I very soon discovered that the straight direction of my soul was marred by foolish
dissipations, and employment with unworthy things. The how and the where were
clear enough to me. Yet by what means could I help myself, or extricate my mind from
the calls of a world where every thing was either cold indifference or hot insanity?
Gladly would I have left things standing as they were, and lived from day to day,
floating down with the stream, like other people whom I saw quite happy: but I durst

not: my inmost feelings contradicted me too often. Yet if I determined to renounce
society, and alter my relations to others, it was not in my power. I was hemmed in as
by a ring drawn round me; certain connections I could not dissolve; and, in the matter
which lay nearest to my heart, fatalities accumulated and oppressed me more and
more. I often went to bed with tears, and, after a sleepless night, arose again with
tears: I required some strong support: and God would not vouchsafe it me while I was
running with the cap and bells.
I proceeded now to estimate my doings, all and each: dancing and play were first put
upon their trial. Never was there any thing spoken, thought, or written, for or against
these practices, which I did not examine, talk of, read, weigh, reject, aggravate, and
plague myself about. If I gave up these habits, I was certain that Narciss would be
offended; for he dreaded exceedingly the ridicule which any look of straitlaced
conscientiousness gives one in the eyes of the world. And doing what I now looked
upon as folly, noxious folly, out of no taste of my own, but merely to gratify him, it all
grew wofully irksome to me.
Without disagreeable prolixities and repetitions, it is not in my power to represent
what pains I took, in trying so to counteract those occupations which distracted my
attention and disturbed my peace of mind, that my heart, in spite of them, might still
be open to the influences of the Invisible Being. But at last, with pain, I was compelled
to admit, that in this way the quarrel could not be composed. For no sooner had I
clothed myself in the garment of folly, than it came to be something more than a
mask, than the foolishness pierced and penetrated me through and through.
May I here overstep the province of a mere historical detail, and offer one or two
remarks on what was then taking place within me? What could it be which so changed
my tastes and feelings, that, in my twenty-second year, nay, earlier, I lost all relish for
the recreations with which people of that age are harmlessly delighted? Why were
they not harmless for me? I may answer, "Just because they were not harmless;
because I was not, like others of my years, unacquainted with my soul." No! I knew,
from experiences which had reached me unsought, that there are loftier emotions,
which afford us a contentment such as it is vain to seek in the amusements of the
world; and that, in these higher joys, there is also kept a secret treasure for
strengthening the spirit in misfortune.
But the pleasures of society, the dissipations of youth, must needs have had a
powerful charm for me; since it was not in my power to engage in them without

participation, to act among them as if they were not there. How many things could I
now do, if I liked, with entire coldness, which then dazzled and confounded me, nay,
threatened to obtain the mastery over me! Here there could no medium be observed:
either those delicious amusements, or my nourishing and quickening internal
emotions, must be given up.
But, in my soul, the strife had, without my own consciousness, already been decided.
Even if there still was any thing within me that longed for earthly pleasures, I had now
become unfitted for enjoying them. Much as a man might hanker after wine, all desire
of drinking would forsake him, if he should be placed among full barrels in a cellar,
where the foul air was like to suffocate him. Free air is more than wine; this I felt but
too keenly: and, from the first, it would have cost me little studying to prefer the good
to the delightful, if the fear of losing the affection of Narciss had not restrained me.
But at last, when after many thousand struggles, and thoughts continually renewed, I
began to cast a steady eye upon the bond which held me to him, I discovered that it
was but weak, that it might be torn asunder. I at once perceived it to be only as a glass
bell, which shut me up in the exhausted, airless space: one bold stroke to break the
bell in pieces, and thou art delivered!
No sooner thought than tried. I drew off the mask, and on all occasions acted as my
heart directed. Narciss I still cordially loved: but the thermometer, which formerly had
stood in hot water, was now hanging in the natural air; it could rise no higher than the
warmth of the atmosphere directed.
Unhappily it cooled very much. Narciss drew back, and began to assume a distant air:
this was at his option, but my thermometer descended as he drew back. Our family
observed this, questioned me, and seemed to be surprised. I explained to them, with
stout defiance, that heretofore I had made abundant sacrifices; that I was ready, still
farther and to the end of my life, to share all crosses that befell him; but that I required
full freedom in my conduct, that my doings and avoidings must depend upon my own
conviction; that, indeed, I would never bigotedly cleave to my own opinion, but, on the
other hand, would willingly be reasoned with; yet, as it concerned my own happiness,
the decision must proceed from myself, and be liable to no manner of constraint. The
greatest physician could not move me, by his reasonings, to take an article of food,
which perhaps was altogether wholesome and agreeable to many, so soon as my
experience had shown, that on all occasions it was noxious to me; as I might produce

coffee for an instance: and just as little, nay, still less, would I have any sort of conduct
which misled me, preached up and demonstrated upon me as morally profitable.
Having so long prepared myself in silence, these debates were rather pleasant than
vexatious to me. I gave vent to my soul: I felt the whole worth of my determination. I
yielded not a hair's-breadth, and those to whom I owed no filial respect were sharply
handled and despatched. In the family I soon prevailed. My mother from her youth
had entertained these sentiments, though in her they had never reached maturity; for
no necessity had pressed upon her, and exalted her courage to achieve her purpose.
She rejoiced in beholding her silent wishes fulfilled through me. My younger sisters
seemed to join themselves with me: the second was attentive and quiet. Our aunt had
the most to object. The arguments which she employed appeared to her irrefragable;
and they were irrefragable, being altogether commonplace. At last I was obliged to
show her, that she had no voice in the affair in any sense; and, after this, she seldom
signified that she persisted in her views. She was, indeed, the only person that
observed this transaction close at hand, without in some degree experiencing its
influence. I do not calumniate her, when I say that she had no character, and the most
limited ideas.
My father had acted altogether in his own way. He spoke not much, but often, with me
on the matter: his arguments were rational; and, being his arguments, they could not
be impugned. It was only the deep feeling of my right that gave me strength to dispute
against him. But the scenes soon changed: I was forced to make appeal to his
heart. Straitened by his understanding, I came out with the most pathetic pleadings. I
gave free course to my tongue and to my tears. I showed him how much I loved
Narciss; how much constraint I had for two years been enduring; how certain I was of
being in the right; that I was ready to testify that certainty, by the loss of my beloved
bridegroom and prospective happiness,—nay, if it were necessary, by the loss of all
that I possessed on earth; that I would rather leave my native country, my parents, and
my friends, and beg my bread in foreign lands, than act against these dictates of my
conscience. He concealed his emotion: he said nothing on the subject for a while, and
at last he openly declared in my favor.
During all this time Narciss forbore to visit us; and my father now gave up the weekly
club, where he was used to meet him. The business made a noise at court, and in the
town. People talked about it, as is common in such cases, which the public takes a
vehement interest in, because its sentence has usurped an influence on the resolutions

of weak minds. I knew enough about the world to understand that one's conduct is
often censured by the very persons who would have advised it, had one consulted
them; and independently of this, with my internal composure, I should have looked on
all such transitory speculations just as if they had not been.
On the other hand, I hindered not myself from yielding to my inclination for Narciss. To
me he had become invisible, and to him my feelings had not altered. I loved him
tenderly; as it were anew, and much more steadfastly than before. If he chose to leave
my conscience undisturbed, then I was his: wanting this condition, I would have
refused a kingdom with him. For several months I bore these feelings and these
thoughts about with me; and, finding at last that I was calm and strong enough to go
peacefully and firmly to work, I wrote him a polite but not a tender note, inquiring why
he never came to see me.
As I knew his manner of avoiding to explain himself in little matters, but of silently
doing what seemed good to him, I purposely urged him in the present instance. I got a
long, and, as it seemed to me, pitiful, reply, in vague style and unmeaning phrases,
stating, that, without a better place, he could not fix himself, and offer me his hand;
that I best knew how hard it had fared with him hitherto; that as he was afraid lest a
fruitless intercourse, so long continued, might prove hurtful to my reputation, I would
give him leave to continue at his present distance; so soon as it was in his power to
make me happy, he would look upon the word which he had given me as sacred.
I answered him on the spot, that, as our intercourse was known to all the world, it
might, perhaps, be rather late to spare my reputation: for which, at any rate, my
conscience and my innocence were the surest pledges; however, that I hereby freely
gave him back his word, and hoped the change would prove a happy one for him. The
same hour I received a short reply, which was, in all essential particulars, entirely
synonymous with the first. He adhered to his former statement, that, so soon as he
obtained a situation, he would ask me, if I pleased, to share his fortune with him.
This I interpreted as meaning simply nothing. I signified to my relations and
acquaintances, that the affair was altogether settled; and it was so in fact. Having, nine
months afterwards, obtained the much-desired preferment, he offered me his hand,
but under the condition, that, as the wife of a man who must keep house like other
people, I should alter my opinions. I returned him many thanks, and hastened with my
heart and mind away from this transaction, as one hastens from the playhouse when
the curtain falls. And as he, a short time afterwards, had found a rich and

advantageous match, a thing now easy for him; and as I now knew him to be happy in
the way he liked,—my own tranquillity was quite complete.
I must not pass in silence the fact, that several times before he got a place, and after it,
there were respectable proposals made to me; which, however, I declined without the
smallest hesitation, much as my father and my mother could have wished for more
compliance on my part.
At length, after a stormy March and April, the loveliest May weather seemed to be
allotted me. With good health, I enjoyed an indescribable composure of mind: look
around me as I pleased, my loss appeared a gain to me. Young and full of sensibility, I
thought the universe a thousand times more beautiful than formerly, when I required
to have society and play, that in the fair garden tedium might not overtake me. And
now, as I did not conceal my piety, I likewise took heart to own my love for the
sciences and arts. I drew, painted, read, and found enough of people to support me:
instead of the great world, which I had left, or, rather, which had left me, a smaller one
formed itself about me, which was infinitely richer and more entertaining. I had a turn
for social life; and I do not deny, that, on giving up my old acquaintances, I trembled at
the thought of solitude. I now found myself abundantly, perhaps excessively,
indemnified. My acquaintances erelong were very numerous, not at home only, but
likewise among people at a distance. My story had been noised abroad, and many
persons felt a curiosity to see the woman who had valued God above her bridegroom.
There was a certain pious tone to be observed, at that time, generally over Germany.
In the families of several counts and princes, a care for the welfare of the soul had
been awakened. Nor were there wanting noblemen who showed a like attention;
while, in the inferior classes, sentiments of this kind were diffused on every side.
The noble family, whom I mentioned above, now drew me nearer to them. They had,
in the mean while, gathered strength; several of their relations having settled in the
town. These estimable persons courted my familiarity, as I did theirs. They had high
connections: I became acquainted, in their house, with a great part of the princes,
counts, and lords of the empire. My sentiments were not concealed from any one:
they might be honored or be tolerated; I obtained my object,—none attacked me.
There was yet another way by which I was again led back into the world. About this
period a step-brother of my father, who till now had never visited the house except in
passing, staid with us for a considerable time. He had left the service of his court,
where he enjoyed great influence and honor, simply because all matters were not

managed quite according to his mind. His intellect was just, his character was rigid. In
these points he was very like my father: only the latter had withal a certain touch of
softness, which enabled him with greater ease to yield a little in affairs, and though not
to do, yet to permit, some things against his own conviction; and then to evaporate his
anger at them, either in silence by himself, or in confidence amid his family. My uncle
was a great deal younger, and his independence of spirit had been favored by his
outward circumstances. His mother had been very rich, and he still had large
possessions to expect from her near and distant relatives; so he needed no foreign
increase: whereas my father, with his moderate fortune, was bound to his place by the
consideration of his salary.
My uncle had become still more unbending from domestic sufferings. He had early lost
an amiable wife and a hopeful son; and, from that time, he appeared to wish to push
away from him every thing that did not hang upon his individual will.
In our family it was whispered now and then with some complacency, that probably he
would not wed again, and so we children might anticipate inheriting his fortune. I paid
small regard to this, but the demeanor of the rest was not a little modified by their
hopes. In his own imperturbable firmness of character, my uncle had grown into the
habit of never contradicting any one in conversation. On the other hand, he listened
with a friendly air to every one's opinion, and would himself elucidate and strengthen
it by instances and reasons of his own. All who did not know him fancied that he
thought as they did: for he was possessed of a preponderating intellect, and could
transport himself into the mental state of any man, and imitate his manner of
conceiving. With me he did not prosper quite so well; for here the question was about
emotions, of which he had not any glimpse: and, with whatever tolerance and
sympathy and rationality he spoke about my sentiments, it was palpable to me, that he
had not the slightest notion of what formed the ground of all my conduct.
With all his secrecy, we by and by found out the aim of his unusual stay with us. He
had, as we at length discovered, cast his eyes upon our youngest sister, with the view
of giving her in marriage, and rendering her happy as he pleased; and certainly,
considering her personal and mental attractions, particularly when a handsome
fortune was laid into the scale along with them, she might pretend to the first
matches. His feelings towards me he likewise showed us pantomimically, by procuring
me a post of canoness, the income of which I very soon began to draw.

My sister was not so contented with his care as I. She now disclosed to me a tender
secret, which hitherto she had very wisely kept back; fearing, as in truth it happened,
that I would by all means counsel her against connection with a man who was not
suited to her. I did my utmost, and succeeded. The purpose of my uncle was too
serious and too distinct: the prospect for my sister, with her worldly views, was too
delightful to be thwarted by a passion which her own understanding disapproved; she
mustered force to give it up.
On her ceasing to resist the gentle guidance of my uncle, the foundation of his plan
was quickly laid. She was appointed maid of honor at a neighboring court, where he
could commit her to the oversight and the instructions of a lady, his friend, who
presided there as governess with great applause. I accompanied her to the place of her
new abode. Both of us had reason to be satisfied with the reception we met with; and
frequently I could not help, in secret, smiling at the character, which now as canoness,
as young and pious canoness, I was enacting in the world.
In earlier times a situation such as this would have confused me dreadfully, perhaps
have turned my head; but now, in the midst of all the splendors that surrounded me, I
felt extremely cool. With great quietness I let them frizzle me, and deck me out for
hours, and thought no more of it than that my place required me to wear that gala
livery. In the thronged saloons I spoke with all and each, though no shape or character
among them made any impression on me. On returning to my house, nearly all the
feeling I brought back with me was that of tired limbs. Yet my understanding drew
advantage from the multitude of persons whom I saw: and I became acquainted with
some ladies, patterns of every virtue, of a noble and good demeanor; particularly with
the governess, under whom my sister was to have the happiness of being formed.
At my return, however, the consequences of this journey, in regard to health, were
found to be less favorable. With the greatest temperance, the strictest diet, I had not
been, as I used to be, completely mistress of my time and strength. Food, motion,
rising, and going to sleep, dressing and visiting, had not depended, as at home, on my
own conveniency and will. In the circle of social life you cannot stop without a breach
of courtesy: all that was needful I had willingly performed; because I looked upon it as
my duty, because I knew that it would soon be over, and because I felt myself
completely healthy. Yet this unusual, restless life must have had more effect upon me
than I was aware of. Scarcely had I reached home, and cheered my parents with a

comfortable narrative, when I was attacked by a hemorrhage, which, although it did
not prove dangerous or lasting, yet left a weakness after it, perceptible for many a day.
Here, then, I had another lesson to repeat. I did it joyfully. Nothing bound me to the
world, and I was convinced that here the true good was never to be found; so I waited
in the cheerfullest and meekest state: and, after having abdicated life, I was retained in
it.
A new trial was awaiting me: my mother took a painful and oppressive ailment, which
she had to bear five years, before she paid the debt of nature. All this time we were
sharply proved. Often, when her terror grew too strong, she would have us all
summoned, in the night, to her bed, that so at least she might be busied, if not
bettered, by our presence. The load grew heavier, nay, scarcely to be borne, when my
father, too, became unwell. From his youth he had frequently had violent headaches,
which, however, at longest never used to last beyond six and thirty hours. But now
they were continual; and, when they mounted to a high degree of pain, his moanings
tore my very heart. It was in these tempestuous seasons that I chiefly felt my bodily
weakness; because it kept me from my holiest and dearest duties, or rendered the
performance of them hard to an extreme degree.
It was now that I could try whether the path which I had chosen was the path of
fantasy or truth; whether I had merely thought as others showed me, or the object of
my trust had a reality. To my unspeakable support, I always found the latter. The
straight direction of my heart to God, the fellowship of the "Beloved Ones." I had
sought and found; and this was what made all things light to me. As a traveller in the
dark, my soul, when all was pressing on me from without, hastened to the place of
refuge; and never did it return empty.
In later times some champions of religion, who seem to be animated more by zeal than
feeling for it, have required of their brethren to produce examples of prayers actually
heard; apparently as wishing to have seal and signature, that so they might proceed
juridically in the matter. How unknown must the true feeling be to these persons! how
few real experiences can they themselves have made!
I can say that I never returned empty, when in straits and oppression I called on God.
This is saying infinitely much: more I must not and can not say. Important as each
experience was at the critical moment for myself, the recital of them would be flat,
improbable, and insignificant, were I to specify the separate cases. Happy was I, that a

thousand little incidents in combination proved, as clearly as the drawing of my breath
proved me to be living, that I was not without God in the world. He was near to me: I
was before him. This is what, with a diligent avoidance of all theological systematic
terms, I can with the greatest truth declare.
Much do I wish, that, in those times too, I had been entirely without system. But which
of us arrives early at the happiness of being conscious of his individual self, in its own
pure combination, without extraneous forms? I was in earnest with religion. I timidly
trusted in the judgments of others: I entirely gave in to the Hallean system of
conversion, but my nature would by no means tally with it.
According to this scheme of doctrine, the alteration of the heart must begin with a
deep terror on account of sin: the heart in this agony must recognize, in a less or
greater degree, the punishment which it has merited, must get a foretaste of hell, and
so embitter the delight of sin. At last it feels a very palpable assurance of grace; which,
however, in its progress often fades away, and must again be sought with earnest
prayer.
Of all this no jot or tittle happened with me. When I sought God sincerely, he let
himself be found of me, and did not reproach me about by-gone things. On looking
back, I saw well enough where I had been unworthy, where I still was so; but the
confession of my faults was altogether without terror. Not for a moment did the fear
of hell occur to me; nay, the very notion of a wicked spirit, and a place of punishment
and torment after death, could nowise gain admission into the circle of my thoughts. I
considered the men who lived without God, whose hearts were shut against the trust
in and the love of the Invisible, as already so unhappy, that a hell and external pains
appeared to promise rather an alleviation than an increase of their misery. I had but to
look upon the persons, in this world, who in their breasts gave scope to hateful
feelings; who hardened their hearts against the good of whatever kind, and strove to
force the evil on themselves and others; who shut their eyes by day, that so they might
deny the shining of the sun. How unutterably wretched did these persons seem to me!
Who could have formed a hell to make their situation worse?
This mood of mind continued in me, without change, for half a score of years. It
maintained itself through many trials, even at the moving death-bed of my beloved
mother. I was frank enough, on this occasion, not to hide my comfortable frame of
mind from certain pious but rigorously orthodox people; and I had to suffer many a
friendly admonition on that score. They reckoned they were just in season, for

explaining with what earnestness one should be diligent to lay a right foundation in the
days of health and youth.
In earnestness I, too, determined not to fail. For the moment I allowed myself to be
convinced; and fain would I have grown, for life, distressed and full of fears. But what
was my surprise on finding that I absolutely could not. When I thought of God, I was
cheerful and contented: even at the painful end of my dear mother, I did not shudder
at the thought of death. Yet I learned many and far other things than my uncalled
teachers thought of, in these solemn hours.
By degrees I grew to doubt the dictates of so many famous people, and retained my
own sentiments in silence. A certain lady of my friends, to whom I had at first disclosed
too much, insisted always on interfering with my business. Of her, too, I was obliged to
rid myself: I at last firmly told her, that she might spare herself this labor, as I did not
need her counsel; that I knew my God, and would have no guide but him. She was
greatly offended: I believe she never quite forgave me.
Such determination to withdraw from the advices and the influence of my friends, in
spiritual matters, produced the consequence, that also in my temporal affairs I gained
sufficient courage to obey my own persuasions. But for the assistance of my faithful,
invisible Leader, I could not have prospered here. I am still gratefully astonished at his
wise and happy guidance. No one knew how matters stood with me: even I myself did
not know.
The thing, the wicked and inexplicable thing, which separates us from the Being to
whom we owe our life, and in whom all that deserves the name of life must find its
nourishment,—the thing which we call sin I yet knew nothing of.
In my intercourse with my invisible Friend, I felt the sweetest enjoyment of all my
powers. My desire of constantly enjoying this felicity was so predominant, that I
abandoned without hesitation whatever marred our intercourse; and here experience
was my best teacher. But it was with me as with sick persons who have no medicine,
and try to help themselves by diet: something is accomplished, but far from enough.
I could not always live in solitude, though in it I found the best preservative against the
dissipation of my thoughts. On returning to the tumult, the impression it produced
upon me was the deeper for my previous loneliness. My most peculiar advantage lay in
this, that love for quiet was my ruling passion, and that in the end I still drew back to it.

I perceived, as in a kind of twilight, my weakness and my misery, and tried to save
myself by avoiding danger and exposure.
For seven years I had used my dietetic scheme. I held myself not wicked, and I thought
my state desirable. But for some peculiar circumstances and occurrences I had
remained in this position: it was by a curious path that I got farther. Contrary to the
advice of all my friends, I entered on a new connection. Their objections, at first, made
me pause. I turned to my invisible Leader; and, as he permitted me, I went forward
without fear.
A man of spirit, heart, and talents had bought a property beside us. Among the
strangers whom I grew acquainted with, were this person and his family. In our
manners, domestic economy, and habits we accorded well; and thus we soon
approximated to each other.
Philo, as I propose to call him, was already middle-aged: in certain matters he was
highly serviceable to my father, whose strength was now decaying. He soon became
the friend of the family: and finding in me, as he was pleased to say, a person free alike
from the extravagance and emptiness of the great world, and from the narrowness
and aridness of the still world in the country, he courted intimacy with me; and erelong
we were in one another's confidence. To me he was very pleasing and useful.
Though I did not feel the smallest inclination or capacity for mingling in public
business, or seeking any influence on it, yet I liked to hear about such matters,—liked
to know whatever happened far and near. Of worldly things, I loved to get a clear
though unconcerned perception: feeling, sympathy, affection, I reserved for God, for
my people, and my friends.
The latter were, if I may say so, jealous of Philo, in my new connection with him. In
more than one sense, they were right in warning me about it. I suffered much in
secret, for even I could not consider their remonstrances as altogether empty or
selfish. I had been accustomed, from of old, to give a reason for my views and conduct;
but in this case my conviction would not follow. I prayed to God, that here, as
elsewhere, he would warn, restrain, and guide me; and, as my heart on this did not
dissuade me, I went forward on my way with comfort.
Philo, on the whole, had a remote resemblance to Narciss: only a pious education had
more enlivened and concentrated his feelings. He had less vanity, more character; and

in business, if Narciss was delicate, exact, persevering, indefatigable, the other was
clear, sharp, quick, and capable of working with incredible ease. By means of him I
learned the secret history of almost every noble personage with whose exterior I had
got acquainted in society. It was pleasant for me to behold the tumult, off my watchtower from afar. Philo could now hide nothing from me: he confided to me, by
degrees, his own concerns, both inward and outward. I was in fear because of him, for
I foresaw certain circumstances and entanglements; and the mischief came more
speedily than I had looked for. There were some confessions he had still kept back, and
even at last he told me only what enabled me to guess the worst.
What an effect had this upon my heart! I attained experiences which to me were
altogether new. With infinite sorrow I beheld an Agathon, who, educated in the groves
of Delphi, still owed his school-fees, which he was now obliged to pay with their
accumulated interest; and this Agathon was my especial friend. My sympathy was
lively and complete; I suffered with him; both of us were in the strangest state.
After having long occupied myself with the temper of his mind, I at last turned round
to contemplate my own. The thought, "Thou art no better than he," rose like a little
cloud before me, and gradually expanded till it darkened all my soul.
I now not only thought myself no better than he: I felt this, and felt it as I should not
wish to do again. Nor was it any transitory mood. For more than a year, I was
compelled to feel, that, had not an unseen hand restrained me, I might have become a
Girard, a Cartouche, a Damiens, or any wretch you can imagine. The tendencies to this
I traced too clearly in my heart. Heavens, what a discovery!
If hitherto I had never been able, in the faintest degree, to recognize in myself the
reality of sin by experience, its possibility was now become apparent to me by
anticipation, in the frightfullest manner. And yet I knew not evil; I but feared it: I felt
that I might be guilty, and could not accuse myself of being so.
Deeply as I was convinced that such a temperament of soul, as I now saw mine to be,
could never be adapted for that union with the invisible Being which I hoped for after
death, I did not, in the smallest, fear that I should finally be separated from him. With
all the wickedness which I discovered in my heart, I still loved Him: I hated what I felt,
nay, wished to hate it still more earnestly; my whole desire was, to be delivered from
this sickness, and this tendency to sickness; and I was persuaded that the great
Physician would at length vouchsafe his help.

The sole question was, What medicine will cure this malady? The practice of virtue?
This I could not for a moment think. For ten years I had already practised more than
mere virtue; and the horrors now first discovered had, all the while, lain hidden at the
bottom of my soul. Might they not have broken out with me, as they did with David
when he looked on Bathsheba? Yet was not he a friend of God! and was not I assured,
in my inmost heart, that God was my friend?
Was it, then, an unavoidable infirmity of human nature? Must we just content
ourselves in feeling and acknowledging the sovereignty of inclination? And, with the
best will, is there nothing left for us but to abhor the fault we have committed, and on
the like occasion to commit it again?
From systems of morality I could obtain no comfort. Neither their severity, by which
they try to bend our inclinations, nor their attractiveness, by which they try to place
our inclinations on the side of virtue, gave me any satisfaction. The fundamental
notions, which I had imbibed from intercourse with my invisible Friend, were of far
higher value to me.
Once, while I was studying the songs composed by David after that tremendous fall, it
struck me very much that he traced his indwelling corruption even in the substance
out of which he had been shaped; yet that he wished to be freed from sin, and that he
earnestly entreated for a pure heart.
But how was this to be attained? The answer from Scripture I was well aware of: "that
the blood of Jesus cleanseth us from all sin," was a Bible truth which I had long known.
But now, for the first time, I observed that as yet I had never understood this oftrepeated saying. The questions, What does it mean? How is it to be? were day and
night working out their answers in me. At last I thought I saw, as by a gleam of light,
that what I sought was to be found in the incarnation of the everlasting Word, by
whom all things, even we ourselves, were made. That the Eternal descended as an
inhabitant to the depths in which we dwell, which he surveys and comprehends; that
he passed through our lot from stage to stage, from conception and birth to the grave;
that by this marvellous circuit he again mounted to those shining heights, whither we
too must rise in order to be happy: all this was revealed to me, as in a dawning
remoteness.
Oh! why must we, in speaking of such things, make use of figures which can only
indicate external situations? Where is there in his eyes aught high or deep, aught dark

or clear? It is we only that have an Under and Upper, a night and day. And even for this
did he become like us, since otherwise we could have had no part in him.
But how shall we obtain a share in this priceless benefit? "By faith," the Scripture says.
And what is faith? To consider the account of an event as true, what help can this
afford me? I must be enabled to appropriate its effects, its consequences. This
appropriating faith must be a state of mind peculiar, and, to the natural man,
unknown.
"Now, gracious Father, grant me faith!" so prayed I once, in the deepest heaviness of
heart. I was leaning on a little table, where I sat: my tear-stained countenance was
hidden in my hands. I was now in the condition in which we seldom are, but in which
we are required to be, if God is to regard our prayers.
Oh, that I could but paint what I felt then! A sudden force drew my soul to the cross
where Jesus once expired: it was a sudden force, a pull, I cannot name it otherwise,
such as leads our soul to an absent loved one; an approximation, which, perhaps, is far
more real and true than we imagine. So did my soul approach the Son of man, who
died upon the cross; and that instant did I know what faith was.
"This is faith!" said I, and started up as if half frightened. I now endeavored to get
certain of my feeling, of my view; and shortly I became convinced that my soul had
acquired a power of soaring upwards which was altogether new to it.
Words fail us in describing such emotions. I could most distinctly separate them from
all fantasy: they were entirely without fantasy, without image; yet they gave us just
such certainty of their referring to some object as our imagination gives us when it
paints the features of an absent lover.
When the first rapture was over, I observed that my present condition of mind had
formerly been known to me; only I had never felt it in such strength; I had never held it
fast, never made it mine. I believe, indeed, every human soul at intervals feels
something of it. Doubtless it is this which teaches every mortal that there is a God.
With such faculty, wont from of old to visit me now and then, I had hitherto been well
content: and had not, by a singular arrangement of events, that unexpected sorrow
weighed upon me for a twelvemonth; had not my own ability and strength, on that

occasion, altogether lost credit with me,—I perhaps might have remained content with
such a state of matters all my days.
But now, since that great moment, I had, as it were, got wings. I could mount aloft
above what used to threaten me; as the bird can fly singing and with ease across the
fiercest stream, while the little dog stands anxiously baying on the bank.
My joy was indescribable; and, though I did not mention it to any one, my people soon
observed an unaccustomed cheerfulness in me, and could not understand the reason
of my joy. Had I but forever held my peace, and tried to nourish this serene temper in
my soul; had I not allowed myself to be misled by circumstances, so as to reveal my
secret,—I might then have been saved once more a long and tedious circuit.
As in the previous ten years of my Christian course, this necessary force had not
existed in my soul, I had just been in the case of other worthy people,—had helped
myself by keeping my fancy always full of images, which had some reference to God,—
a practice so far truly useful; for noxious images and their baneful consequences are by
that means kept away. Often, too, our spirit seizes one or other of these spiritual
images, and mounts with it a little way upwards, like a young bird fluttering from twig
to twig.
Images and impressions pointing towards God are presented to us by the institutions
of the Church, by organs, bells, singing, and particularly by the preaching of our
pastors. Of these I used to be unspeakably desirous; no weather, no bodily weakness,
could keep me from church; the sound of the Sunday bells was the only thing that
rendered me impatient on a sick-bed. Our head court-chaplain, a gifted man, I heard
with great pleasure; his colleagues, too, I liked: and I could pick the golden apple of the
Word from the common fruit, with which on earthen platters it was mingled. With
public ordinances, all sorts of private exercises were combined; and these, too, only
nourished fancy and a finer kind of sense. I was so accustomed to this track, I
reverenced it so much, that even now no higher one occurred to me. For my soul has
only feelers, and not eyes: it gropes, but does not see. Ah! that it could get eyes, and
look!
Now again, therefore, I went with a longing mind to sermon; but, alas! what
happened? I no longer found what I was wont to find. These preachers were blunting
their teeth on the shell, while I enjoyed the kernel. I soon grew weary of them; and I
had already been so spoiled, that I could not be content with the little they afforded

me. I required images, I wanted impressions from without, and reckoned it a pure
spiritual desire that I felt.
Philo's parents had been in connection with the Herrnhuter Community: in his library
were many writings of Count Zinzendorf's. He had spoken with me, more than once,
very candidly and clearly on the subject; inviting me to turn over one or two of these
treatises, if it were but for the sake of studying a psychological phenomenon. I looked
upon the count, and those that followed him, as very heterodox; and so the Ebersdorf
Hymn-book, which my friend had pressed upon me, lay unread.
However, in this total destitution of external excitements for my soul, I opened the
hymn-book, as it were, by chance, and found in it, to my astonishment, some songs
which actually, though under a fantastic form, appeared to shadow what I felt. The
originality and simplicity of their expression drew me on. It seemed to be peculiar
emotions expressed in a peculiar way: no school technology suggested any notion of
formality or commonplace. I was persuaded that these people felt as I did: I was very
happy to lay hold of here and there a stanza in their songs, to fix it in my memory, and
carry it about with me for days.
Since the moment when the truth had been revealed to me, some three months had in
this way passed on. At last I came to the resolution of disclosing every thing to Philo,
and asking him to let me have those writings, about which I had now become
immoderately curious. Accordingly I did so, notwithstanding there was something in
my heart which earnestly dissuaded me.
I circumstantially related to him all the story; and as he was himself a leading person in
it, and my narrative conveyed the sharpest reprimand on him, he felt surprised and
moved to an extreme degree. He melted into tears. I rejoiced; believing that, in his
mind also, a full and fundamental change had taken place.
He provided me with all the writings I could require, and now I had excess of
nourishment for my imagination. I made rapid progress in the Zinzendorfic mode of
thought and speech. And be it not supposed that I am yet incapable of prizing the
peculiar turn and manner of the count. I willingly do him justice: he is no empty
fantast; he speaks of mighty truths, and mostly in a bold, figurative style; the people
who despise him know not either how to value or discriminate his qualities.

At that time I became exceedingly attached to him. Had I been mistress of myself, I
would certainly have left my friends and country, and gone to join him. We should
infallibly have understood each other, and should hardly have agreed together long.
Thanks to my better genius, that now kept me so confined by my domestic duties! I
reckoned it a distant journey if I visited the garden. The charge of my aged, weakly
father afforded me employment enough; and in hours of recreation, I had Fancy to
procure me pastime. The only mortal whom I saw was Philo; he was highly valued by
my father; but, with me, his intimacy had been cooled a little by the late explanation.
Its influence on him had not penetrated deep: and, as some attempts to talk in my
dialect had not succeeded with him, he avoided touching on this subject; and the
rather, as his extensive knowledge put it always in his power to introduce new topics in
his conversation.
I was thus a Herrnhut sister on my own footing. I had especially to hide this new turn
of my temper and my inclinations from the head court-chaplain, whom, as my father
confessor, I had much cause to honor, and whose high merits his extreme aversion to
the Herrnhut Community did not diminish, in my eyes, even then. Unhappily this
worthy person had to suffer many troubles on account of me and others.
Several years ago he had become acquainted with an upright, pious gentleman,
residing in a distant quarter, and had long continued in unbroken correspondence with
him, as with one who truly sought God. How painful was it to the spiritual leader,
when this gentleman subsequently joined himself to the Community of Herrnhut,
where he lived for a long while! How delightful, on the other hand, when at length
he quarrelled with the brethren, determined to settle in our neighborhood, and
seemed once more to yield himself completely to the guidance of his ancient friend!
The stranger was presented, as in triumph, by the upper pastor, to all the chosen
lambs of his fold. To our house alone he was not introduced, because my father did
not now see company. The gentleman obtained no little approbation: he combined the
polish of the court with the winning manner of the brethren; and, having also many
fine qualities by nature, he soon became the favorite saint with all who knew him,—a
result at which the chaplain was exceedingly contented. But, alas! it was merely in
externals that the gentleman had split with the Community: in his heart he was yet
entirely a Herrnhuter. He was, in truth, concerned for the reality of the matter; but yet
the gimcracks, which the count had stuck round it, were, at the same time, quite
adapted to his taste. Besides, he had now become accustomed to this mode of

speaking and conceiving: and, if he had to hide it carefully from his old friend, the
gladder was he, in any knot of trusty persons, to come forth with his couplets, litanies,
and little figures; in which, as might have been supposed, he met with great applause.
I knew nothing of the whole affair, and wandered quietly along in my separate path.
For a good while we continued mutually unknown.
Once, in a leisure hour, I happened to visit a lady who was sick. I found several
acquaintances with her, and soon perceived that my appearance had cut short their
conversation. I affected not to notice any thing, but saw erelong, with great surprise,
some Herrnhut figures stuck upon the wall in elegant frames. Quickly comprehending
what had passed before my entrance, I expressed my pleasure at the sight, in a few
suitable verses.
Conceive the wonder of my friends! We explained ourselves: instantly we were agreed,
and in each other's confidence.
I often henceforth sought opportunities of going out. Unhappily I found such only once
in the three or four weeks; yet I grew acquainted with our gentleman apostle, and by
degrees with all the body. I visited their meetings when I could: with my social
disposition, it was quite delightful for me to communicate to others, and to hear from
them, the feelings which, till now, I had conceived and harbored by myself.
But I was not so completely taken with my friends, as not to see that few of them
could really feel the sense of those affecting words and emblems; and that from these
they drew as little benefit as formerly they did from the symbolic language of the
Church. Yet, notwithstanding, I went on with them, not letting this disturb me. I
thought I was not called to search and try the hearts of others. Had not I, too, by longcontinued innocent exercisings of that sort, been prepared for something better? I had
my share of profit from our meetings: in speaking, I insisted on attending to the sense
and spirit, which, in things so delicate, is rather apt to be disguised by words than
indicated by them; and for the rest, I left, with silent tolerance, each to act according
to his own conviction.
These quiet times of secret social joy were shortly followed by storms of open
bickering and contradiction,—contentions which excited great commotion, I might
almost say occasioned not a little scandal, in court and town. The period was now
arrived when our chaplain, that stout gain-sayer of the Herrnhut Brethren, must

discover to his deep, but, I trust, sanctified humiliation, that his best and once most
zealous hearers were now all leaning to the side of that community. He was
excessively provoked: in the first moments he forgot all moderation, and could not,
even if he had inclined it, retract afterwards. Violent debates took place, in which
happily I was not mentioned, both as being an accidental member of those hated
meetings, and then because, in respect of certain civic matters, our zealous preacher
could not safely disoblige either my father or my friend. With silent satisfaction I
continued neutral. It was irksome to me to converse about such feelings and objects,
even with well-affected people, when they could not penetrate the deepest sense, and
lingered merely on the surface. But to strive with adversaries, about things on which
even friends could scarcely understand each other, seemed to me unprofitable, nay,
pernicious. For I soon perceived, that many amiable noblemen, who on this occurrence
could not shut their hearts to enmity and hatred, had rapidly passed over to injustice,
and, in order to defend an outward form, had almost sacrificed their most substantial
duties.
Far as the worthy clergyman might, in the present case, be wrong; much as others
tried to irritate me at him,—I could never hesitate to give him my sincere respect. I
knew him well: I could candidly transport myself into his way of looking at these
matters. I have never seen a man without his weaknesses: only in distinguished men
they strike us more. We wish, and will at all rates have it, that persons privileged as
they are should at the same time pay no tribute, no tax whatever. I honored him as a
superior man, and hoped to use the influence of my calm neutrality to bring about, if
not a peace, at least a truce. I know not what my efforts might have done; but God
concluded the affair more briefly, and took the chaplain to himself. On his coffin all
wept, who had lately been striving with him about words. His uprightness, his fear of
God, no one had ever doubted.
I, too, was erelong forced to lay aside this Herrnhut doll-work, which, by means of
these contentions, now appeared before me in a rather different light. Our uncle had,
in silence, executed his intentions with my sister. He offered her a young man of rank
and fortune as a bridegroom, and showed, by a rich dowry, what might be expected of
himself. My father joyfully consented: my sister was free and forewarned; she did not
hesitate to change her state. The bridal was appointed at my uncle's castle: family and
friends were all invited, and we came together in the cheerfullest mood.

For the first time in my life, the aspect of a house excited admiration in me. I had often
heard of my uncle's taste, of his Italian architect, of his collections and his library; but,
comparing this with what I had already seen, I had formed a very vague and fluctuating
picture of it in my thoughts. Great, accordingly, was my surprise at the earnest and
harmonious impression which I felt on entering the house, and which every hall and
chamber deepened. If elsewhere pomp and decoration had but dissipated my
attention, I felt here concentrated and drawn back upon myself. In like manner the
preparatives for these solemnities and festivals produced a silent pleasure, by their air
of dignity and splendor; and to me it seemed as inconceivable that one man could
have invented and arranged all this, as that more than one could have worked
together in so high a spirit. Yet, withal, the landlord and his people were entirely
natural: not a trace of stiffness or of empty form was to be seen.
The wedding itself was managed in a striking way: an exquisite strain of vocal music
came upon us by surprise, and the clergyman went through the ceremony with a
singular solemnity. I was standing by Philo at the time; and, instead of a
congratulation, he whispered in my ear, "When I saw your sister give away her hand, I
felt as if a stream of boiling water had been poured over me."—"Why so?" I inquired.
"It is always the way with me," said he, "when I see two people joined." I laughed at
him, but I have often since had cause to recollect his words.
The revel of the party, among whom were many young people, looked particularly
glittering and airy; as every thing around us was dignified and serious. The furniture,
plate, table-ware, and table-ornaments accorded with the general whole; and if in
other houses you would say the architect was of the school of the confectioner, it here
appeared as if even our confectioner and butler had taken lessons from the architect.
We staid together several days, and our intelligent and gifted landlord had variedly
provided for the entertainment of his guests. I did not in the present case repeat the
melancholy proof, which has so often in my life been forced upon me, how unhappily a
large mixed company are situated, when, altogether left to themselves, they have to
select the most general and vapid pastimes, that the fools of the party may not want
amusement, however it may fare with those that are not such.
My uncle had arranged it altogether differently. Two or three marshals, if I may call
them so, had been appointed by him: one of them had charge of providing
entertainment for the young. Dances, excursions, little games, were of his invention
and under his direction: and as young people take delight in being out-of-doors, and

do not fear the influences of the air, the garden and garden-hall had been assigned to
them; while some additional pavilions and galleries had been erected and appended to
the latter, formed of boards and canvas merely, but in such proportions, so elegant
and noble, they reminded one of nothing but stone and marble.
How rare is a festivity in which the person who invites the guests feels also that it is his
duty to provide for their conveniences and wants of every kind!
Hunting and card parties, short promenades, opportunities for trustful private
conversations, were afforded the elder persons; and whoever wished to go earliest to
bed was sure to be lodged the farthest from noise.
By this happy order, the space we lived in appeared to be a little world: and yet,
considered narrowly, the castle was not large; without an accurate knowledge of it,
and without the spirit of its owner, it would have been impossible to entertain so many
people here, and quarter each according to his humor.
As the aspect of a well-formed person pleases us, so also does a fair establishment, by
means of which the presence of a rational, intelligent mind is manifested. We feel a joy
in entering even a cleanly house, though it may be tasteless in its structure and its
decorations, because it shows us the presence of a person cultivated in at least one
sense. Doubly pleasing is it, therefore, when, from a human dwelling, the spirit of a
higher though merely sensual culture speaks to us.
All this was vividly impressed on my observation at my uncle's castle. I had heard and
read much of art; Philo, too, was a lover of pictures, and had a fine collection: I myself
had often practised drawing; but I had been too deeply occupied with my emotions,
striving exclusively after the one thing needful, which alone I was bent on carrying to
perfection; and then, such objects of art as I had hitherto seen, appeared, like all other
worldly objects, to distract my thoughts. But now, for the first time, outward things
had led me back upon myself: I now first perceived the difference between the natural
charm of the nightingale's song, and that of a four-voiced anthem pealed from the
expressive organs of men.
My joy over this discovery I did not hide from my uncle, who, when all the rest were
settled at their posts, was wont to come and talk with me in private. He spoke with
great modesty of what he possessed and had produced here, with great decision of the
views in which it had been gathered and arranged: and I could easily observe that he

spoke with a forbearance towards me; seeming, in his usual way, to rate the
excellence, which he himself possessed below that other excellence, which, in my way
of thinking, was the best and properest.
"If we can conceive it possible," he once observed, "that the Creator of the world
himself assumed the form of his creature, and lived in that manner for a time upon
earth, this creature must appear to us of infinite perfection, because susceptible of
such a combination with its Maker. Hence, in our idea of man, there can be no
inconsistency with our idea of God; and if we often feel a certain disagreement with
him and remoteness from him, it is but the more on that account our duty, not like
advocates of the wicked Spirit, to keep our eyes continually upon the nakedness and
weakness of our nature, but rather to seek out every property and beauty by which
our pretension to a similarity with the Divinity may be made good."
I smiled, and answered, "Do not make me blush, dear uncle, by your complaisance in
talking in my language! What you have to say is of such importance to me, that I wish
to hear it in your own most peculiar style; and then what parts of it I cannot quite
appropriate I will endeavor to translate."
"I may continue," he replied, "in my own most peculiar way, without any alteration of
my tone. Man's highest merit always is, as much as possible to rule external
circumstances, and as little as possible to let himself be ruled by them. Life lies before
us, as a huge quarry lies before the architect: he deserves not the name of architect,
except when, out of this fortuitous mass, he can combine, with the greatest economy
and fitness and durability, some form, the pattern of which originated in his spirit. All
things without us, nay, I may add, all things on us, are mere elements; but deep within
us lies the creative force, which out of these can produce what they were meant to be,
and which leaves us neither sleep nor rest, till, in one way or another, without us or on
us, that same have been produced. You, my dear niece, have, it may be, chosen the
better part; you have striven to bring your moral being, your earnest, lovely nature,
into accordance with itself and with the Highest: but neither ought we to be blamed,
when we strive to get acquainted with the sentient man in all his comprehensiveness,
and to bring about an active harmony among his powers."
By such discoursing, we in time grew more familiar; and I begged of him to speak with
me as with himself, omitting every sort of condescension. "Do not think," replied my
uncle, "that I flatter you when I commend your mode of thinking and acting. I
reverence the individual who understands distinctly what it is he wishes; who

unweariedly advances, who knows the means conducive to his object, and can seize
and use them. How far his object may be great or little, may merit praise or censure, is
the next consideration with me. Believe me, love, most part of all the misery and
mischief, of all that is denominated evil in the world, arises from the fact, that men are
too remiss to get a proper knowledge of their aims, and, when they do know them, to
work intensely in attaining them. They seem to me like people who have taken up
a notion that they must and will erect a tower, and who yet expend on the foundation
not more stones and labor than would be sufficient for a hut. If you, my friend, whose
highest want it was to perfect and unfold your moral nature, had, instead of those bold
and noble sacrifices, merely trimmed between your duties to yourself and to your
family, your bridegroom, or perhaps your husband, you must have lived in constant
contradiction with your feelings, and never could have had a peaceful moment."
"You employ the word sacrifice," I answered here: "and I have often thought, that to a
higher purpose, as to a divinity, we offer up by way of sacrifice a thing of smaller value;
feeling like persons who should willingly and gladly bring a favorite lamb to the altar
for the health of a beloved father."
"Whatever it may be," said he, "reason or feeling, that commands us to give up the
one thing for the other, to choose the one before the other, decision and perseverance
are, in my opinion, the noblest qualities of man. You cannot have the ware and the
money both at the same time; and he who always hankers for the ware without having
heart to give the money for it, is no better off than he who repents him of the
purchase when the ware is in his hands. But I am far from blaming men on this
account: it is not they that are to blame; it is the difficult, entangled situation they are
in: they know not how to guide themselves in its perplexities. Thus, for instance, you
will on the average find fewer bad economists in the country than in towns, and fewer
again in small towns than in great; and why? Man is intended for a limited condition;
objects that are simple, near, determinate, he comprehends, and he becomes
accustomed to employ such means as are at hand; but, on entering a wider field, he
now knows neither what he would nor what he should; and it amounts to quite the
same, whether his attention is distracted by the multitude of objects, or is
overpowered by their magnitude and dignity. It is always a misfortune for him when he
is induced to struggle after any thing with which he cannot connect himself by some
regular exertion of his powers.

"Certainly," pursued he, "without earnestness there is nothing to be done in life; yet,
among the people whom we name cultivated men, little earnestness is to be found: in
labors and employments, in arts, nay, even in recreations, they proceed, if I may say
so, with a sort of self-defence; they live, as they read a heap of newspapers, only to
have done with it; they remind one of that young Englishman at Rome, who said, with
a contented air one evening in some company, that to-day he had despatched six
churches and two galleries. They wish to know and learn a multitude of things, and
precisely those they have the least concern with; and they never see that hunger is not
stilled by snapping at the air. When I become acquainted with a man, my first inquiry
is, With what does he employ himself, and how, and with what degree of
perseverance? The answer regulates the interest I shall take in him for life."
"My dear uncle," I replied, "you are, perhaps, too rigorous: you perhaps withdraw your
helping hand from here and there a worthy man to whom you might be useful."
"Can it be imputed as a fault," said he, "to one who has so long and vainly labored on
them and about them? How much we have to suffer in our youth from men who think
they are inviting us to a delightful pleasure-party, when they undertake to introduce us
to the Danaides or Sisyphus! Heaven be praised! I have rid myself of these people: if
one of them unfortunately comes within my sphere, I forthwith, in the politest
manner, compliment him out again. It is from such persons that you hear the bitterest
complaints about the miserable course of things, the aridity of science, the levity of
artists, the emptiness of poets, and much more of that sort. They do not recollect that
they, and the many like them, are the very persons who would never read a book
which had been written just as they require it; that true poetry is alien to them; that
even an excellent work of art can never gain their approbation except by means of
prejudice. But let us now break off, for this is not the time to rail or to complain."
He directed my attention to the different pictures hanging on the wall: my eye dwelt
on those whose look was beautiful or subject striking. This he permitted for a while: at
last he said, "Bestow a little notice on the spirit manifested in these other works. Good
minds delight to trace the finger of the Deity in nature: why not likewise pay some
small regard to the hand of his imitator?" He then led my observation to some
unobtrusive figures; endeavoring to make me understand that it was the history of art
alone which could give us an idea of the worth and dignity of any work of art; that we
should know the weary steps of mere handicraft and mechanism, over which the man
of talents has struggled in the course of centuries, before we can conceive how it is

possible for the man of genius to move with airy freedom on the pinnacle whose very
aspect makes us giddy.
With this view he had formed a beautiful series of works; and, whilst he explained it, I
could not help conceiving that I saw before me a similitude of moral culture. When I
expressed my thought to him, he answered, "You are altogether right; and we see
from this, that those do not act well, who, in a solitary, exclusive manner, follow moral
cultivation by itself. On the contrary, it will be found, that he whose spirit strives for a
development of that kind, has likewise every reason, at the same time, to improve his
finer sentient powers; that so he may not run the risk of sinking from his moral height
by giving way to the enticements of a lawless fancy, and degrading his moral nature by
allowing it to take delight in tasteless baubles, if not in something worse."
I did not suspect him of levelling at me; but I felt myself struck, when I reflected how
many insipidities there might be in the songs that used to edify me, and how little
favor the figures which had joined themselves to my religious ideas would have found
in the eyes of my uncle.
Philo, in the mean time, had frequently been busied in the library: he now took me
along with him. We admired the selection, as well as the multitude, of books. They had
been collected on my uncle's general principle: there were none to be found among
them but such as either lead to correct knowledge, or teach right arrangement; such as
either give us fit materials, or further the concordance of our spirit.
In the course of my life I had read very largely; in certain branches, there was almost
no work unknown to me: the more pleasant was it here to speak about the general
survey of the whole; to mark deficiencies, and not, as elsewhere, see nothing but a
hampered confusion or a boundless expansion.
Here, too, we became acquainted with a very interesting, quiet man. He was a
physician and a naturalist: he seemed rather one of the Penates than of the inmates.
He showed us the museum, which, like the library, was fixed in glass cases to the walls
of the chambers, adorning and ennobling the space, which it did not crowd. On this
occasion I recalled with joy the days of my youth, and showed my father many of
the things he had been wont to lay upon the sick-bed of his little child, just opening its
little eyes to look into the world then. At the same time the physician, in our present
and following conversations, did not scruple to avow how near he approximated to me
in respect of my religious sentiments: he warmly praised my uncle for his tolerance,

and his esteem of all that testified or forwarded the worth and unity of human nature;
admitting, also, that he called for a similar return from others, and would shun and
condemn nothing else so heartily as individual pretension and narrow exclusiveness.
Since the nuptials of my sister, joy had sparkled in the eyes of our uncle: he often
spoke with me of what he meant to do for her and for her children. He had several fine
estates: he managed them himself, and hoped to leave them in the best condition to
his nephews. Regarding the small estate where we at present were, he appeared to
entertain peculiar thoughts. "I will leave it to none," said he, "but to a person who can
understand and value and enjoy what it contains, and who feels how loudly every man
of wealth and rank, especially in Germany, is called on to exhibit something like a
model to others."
Most of his guests were now gone: we, too, were making ready for departure, thinking
we had seen the final scene of this solemnity, when his attention in affording us some
dignified enjoyment produced a new surprise. We had mentioned to him the delight
which the chorus of voices, suddenly commencing without accompaniment of any
instrument, had given us, at my sister's marriage. We hinted, at the same time, how
pleasant it would be were such a thing repeated; but he seemed to pay no heed to us.
The livelier was our surprise, when he said, one evening, "The music of the dance has
died away; our transitory, youthful friends have left us; the happy pair themselves
have a more serious look than they had some days ago. To part at such a time, when,
perhaps, we shall never meet again, certainly never without changes, exalts us to a
solemn mood, which I know not how to entertain more nobly than by the music you
were lately signifying a desire to have repeated."
The chorus, which had in the mean while gathered strength, and by secret practice
more expertness, was accordingly made to sing to us a series of four and of eight
voiced melodies, which, if I may say so, gave a real foretaste of bliss. Till then I had only
known the pious mode of singing, as good souls practise it, frequently with hoarse
pipes, imagining, like wild birds, that they are praising God, while they procure a
pleasant feeling to themselves. Or, perhaps, I had listened to the vain music of
concerts, in which you are at best invited to admire the talent of the singer, and very
seldom have even a transient enjoyment. Now, however, I was listening to music,
which, as it originated in the deepest feeling of the most accomplished human beings,
was, by suitable and practised organs in harmonious unity, made again to address the
deepest and best feelings of man, and to impress him at that moment with a lively

sense of his likeness to the Deity. They were all devotional songs, in the Latin language:
they sat like jewels in the golden ring of a polished intellectual conversation; and,
without pretending to edify, they elevated me and made me happy in the most
spiritual manner.
At our departure he presented all of us with handsome gifts. To me he gave the cross
of my order, more beautifully and artfully worked and enamelled than I had ever seen
it before. It was hung upon a large brilliant, by which also it was fastened to the chain:
this he gave me, he said, "as the noblest stone in the cabinet of a collector."
My sister, with her husband, went to their estates, the rest of us to our abodes;
appearing to ourselves, so far as outward circumstances were concerned, to have
returned to quite an every-day existence. We had been, as it were, dropped from a
palace of the fairies down upon the common earth, and were again obliged to help
ourselves as we best could.
The singular experiences which this new circle had afforded left a fine impression on
my mind. This, however, did not long continue in its first vivacity: though my uncle
tried to nourish and renew it by sending me certain of his best and most pleasing
works of art; changing them, from time to time, with others which I had not seen.
I had been so much accustomed to be busied with myself, in regulating the concerns of
my heart and temper, and conversing on these matters with persons of a like mind,
that I could not long study any work of art attentively without being turned by it back
upon myself. I was used to look at a picture or copper-plate merely as at the letters of
a book. Fine printing pleases well, but who would read a book for the beauty of the
printing? In like manner I required of each pictorial form that it should tell me
something, should instruct, affect, improve me; and,after all my uncle's letters to
expound his works of art, say what he would, I continued in my former humor.
Yet not only my peculiar disposition, but external incidents and changes in our family,
still farther drew me back from contemplations of that nature; nay, for some time
even from myself. I had to suffer and to do more than my slender strength seemed fit
for.
My maiden sister had, till now, been as a right arm to me. Healthy, strong, unspeakably
good-natured, she had managed all the housekeeping; I myself being busied with the
personal nursing of our aged father. She was seized with a catarrh, which changed to a

disorder of the lungs: in three weeks she was lying in her coffin. Her death inflicted
wounds on me, the scars of which I am not yet willing to examine.
I was lying sick before they buried her: the old ailment in my breast appeared to be
awakening; I coughed with violence, and was so hoarse I could not speak beyond a
whisper.
My married sister, out of fright and grief, was brought to bed before her time. Our old
father thought he was about to lose at once his children and the hope of their
posterity; his natural tears increased my sorrow: I prayed to God that he would give
me back a sufferable state of health. I asked him but to spare my life till my father
should die. I recovered: I was what I reckoned well, being able to discharge my duties,
though with pain.
My sister was again with child. Many cares, which in such cases are committed to the
mother, in the present instance fell to me. She was not altogether happy with her
husband; this was to be hidden from our father: I was often made judge of their
disputes, in which I could decide with the greater safety, as my brother trusted in me;
and the two were really worthy persons, only each of them, instead of humoring,
endeavored to convince, the other, and, out of eagerness to live in constant harmony,
never could agree. I now learned to mingle seriously in worldly matters, and to practise
what of old I had but sung.
My sister bore a son: the frailty of my father did not hinder him from travelling to her.
The sight of the child exceedingly enlivened and cheered him: at the christening,
contrary to his custom, he seemed as if inspired; nay, I might say like a Genius with two
faces. With the one, he looked joyfully forward to those regions which he soon hoped
to enter; with the other, to the new, hopeful, earthly life which had arisen in the boy
descended from him. On our journey home he never wearied talking to me of the
child, its form, its health, and his wish that the gifts of this new denizen of earth might
be rightly cultivated. His reflections on the subject lasted when we had arrived at
home: it was not till some days afterwards that I observed a kind of fever in him, which
displayed itself, without shivering, in a sort of languid heat commencing after dinner.
He did not yield, however: he went out as usual in the mornings, faithfully attending to
the duties of his office, till at last continuous serious symptoms kept him within doors.

I never shall forget with what distinctness, clearness, and repose of mind he settled in
the greatest order the concerns of his house, nay, the arrangements of his funeral, as
he would have done a business of some other person.
With a cheerfulness which he never used to show, and which now mounted to a lively
joy, he said to me, "Where is the fear of death which I once felt? Shall I shrink at
departing? I have a gracious God; the grave awakens no terror in me; I have an eternal
life."
To recall the circumstances of his death, which shortly followed, forms one of the most
pleasing entertainments of my solitude: the visible workings of a higher Power in that
solemn time, no one shall ever argue from me.
The death of my beloved father altogether changed my mode of life. From the strictest
obedience, the narrowest confinement, I passed at once into the greatest freedom: I
enjoyed it like a sort of food from which one has long abstained. Formerly I very
seldom spent two hours from home: now I very seldom lived a day there. My friends,
whom I had been allowed to visit only by hurried snatches, wished now to have my
company without interruption, as I did to have theirs. I was often asked to dinner: at
walks and pleasure-jaunts I never failed. But, when once the circle had been fairly run,
I saw that the invaluable happiness of liberty consisted, not in doing what one pleases
and what circumstances may invite to, but in being able, without hinderance or
restraint, to do in the direct way what one regards as right and proper; and, in this
instance, I was old enough to reach a valuable truth, without smarting for my
ignorance.
One pleasure I could not deny myself: it was, as soon as might be, to renew and
strengthen my connection with the Herrnhut Brethren. I hastened, accordingly, to visit
one of their establishments at no great distance; but here I by no means found what I
had been anticipating. I was frank enough to signify my disappointment, which they
tried to soften by alleging that the present settlement was nothing to a full and fitly
organized community. This I did not take upon me to deny; yet, in my thought, the
genuine spirit of the matter might have displayed itself in a small body as well as in a
great one.
One of their bishops, who was present, a personal disciple of the count, took
considerable pains with me. He spoke English perfectly; and as I, too, understood a
little of it, he reckoned this a token that we both belonged to one class. I, however,

reckoned nothing of the kind: his conversation did not in the least satisfy me. He had
been a cutler; was a native of Moravia; his mode of thought still savored of the artisan.
With Herr Von L——, who had been a major in the French service, I got upon a better
footing: yet I could never bring myself to the submissiveness he showed to his
superiors; nay, I felt as if you had given me a box on the ear, when I saw the major's
wife, and other women more or less like ladies, take the bishop's hand and kiss it.
Meanwhile a journey into Holland was proposed; which, however, doubtless for my
good, did not take place.
My sister had been delivered of a daughter; and now it was the turn of us women to
exult, and consider how the little creature should be bred like one of us. The husband,
on the other hand, was not so satisfied, when in the following year another daughter
saw the light: with his large estates, he wanted to have boys about him, who in future
might assist him in his management.
My health was feeble: I kept myself in peace, and, by a quiet mode of life, in tolerable
equilibrium. I was not afraid of death; nay, I wished to die: yet I secretly perceived that
God was granting time for me to prove my soul, and to advance still nearer to himself.
In my many sleepless nights, especially, I have at times felt something which I cannot
undertake to describe.
It was as if my soul were thinking separately from the body: she looked upon the body
as a foreign substance, as we look upon a garment. She pictured with extreme vivacity
events and times long past, and felt, by means of this, events that were to follow.
Those times are all gone by; what follows likewise will go by; the body, too, will fall to
pieces like a vesture; but I, the well-known I, I am.
The thought is great, exalted, and consoling; yet an excellent friend, with whom I every
day became more intimate, instructed me to dwell on it as little as I could. This was the
physician whom I met in my uncle's house, and who had since accurately informed
himself about the temper of my body and my spirit. He showed me how much these
feelings, when we cherish them within us independently of outward objects, tend, as it
were, to excavate us, and to undermine the whole foundation of our being. "To be
active," he would say, "is the primary vocation of man: all the intervals in which he is
obliged to rest, he should employ in gaining clearer knowledge of external things; for
this will in its turn facilitate activity."

This friend was acquainted with my custom of looking on my body as an outward
object: he knew also that I pretty well understood my constitution, my disorder, and
the medicines of use for it; nay, that, by continual sufferings of my own or other
people's, I had really grown a kind of half-doctor: he now carried forward my attention
from the human body, and the drugs which act upon it, to the kindred objects of
creation; he led me up and down as in the paradise of the first man; only, if I may
continue my comparison, allowing me to trace, in dim remoteness, the Creator walking
in the garden in the cool of the evening.
How gladly did I now see God in nature, when I bore him with such certainty within my
heart! How interesting to me was his handiwork! how thankful did I feel that he had
pleased to quicken me with the breath of his mouth!
We again had hopes that my sister would present us with a boy: her husband waited
anxiously for that event, but did not live to see it. He died in consequence of an
unlucky fall from horseback; and my sister followed him, soon after she had brought
into the world a lovely boy. The four orphans they had left I could not look at but with
sadness. So many healthy people had been called away before poor, sickly me; might I
not also have blights to witness among these fair and hopeful blossoms? I knew the
world sufficiently to understand what dangers threaten the precarious breeding of a
child, especially a child of quality; and it seemed as if, since the period of my youth,
these dangers had increased. I felt that, weakly as I was, I could not be of much,
perhaps of any, service to the little ones; and I rejoiced the more on finding that my
uncle, as indeed might have been looked for, had determined to devote his whole
attention to the education of these amiable creatures. And this they doubtless merited
in every sense: they were handsome; and, with great diversities, all promised to be
well-conditioned, reasonable persons.
Since my worthy doctor had suggested it, I loved to trace out family likenesses among
our relatives and children. My father had carefully preserved the portraits of his
ancestors, and got his own and those of his descendants drawn by tolerable masters;
nor had my mother and her people been forgotten. We accurately knew the characters
of all the family; and, as we had frequently compared them with each other, we now
endeavored to discover in the children the same peculiarities outward or inward. My
sister's eldest son, we thought, resembled his paternal grandfather, of whom there
was a fine youthful picture in my uncle's collection: he had been a brave soldier; and in
this point, too, the boy took after him, liking arms above all things, and busying himself

with them whenever he paid me a visit. For my father had left a very pretty armory;
and the boy got no rest till I had given him a pair of pistols and a fowling-piece, and he
had learned the proper way of using them. At the same time, in his conduct or bearing,
there was nothing like rudeness: far from that, he was always meek and sensible.
The eldest daughter had attracted my especial love; of which, perhaps, the reason was,
that she resembled me, and of all the four seemed to like me best. But I may well
admit, that, the more closely I observed her as she grew, the more she shamed me: I
could not look on her without a sentiment of admiration, nay, I may almost say, of
reverence. You would scarcely have seen a nobler form, a more peaceful spirit, an
activity so equable and universal. No moment of her life was she unoccupied, and
every occupation in her hands became dignified. All seemed indifferent to her, so that
she could but accomplish what was proper in the place and time; and, in the same
manner, she could patiently continue unemployed, when there was nothing to be
done. This activity without need of occupation I have never elsewhere met with. In
particular, her conduct to the suffering and destitute was, from her earliest youth,
inimitable. For my part, I freely confess I never had the gift to make a business of
beneficence: I was not niggardly to the poor; nay, I often gave too largely for my
means; yet this was little more than buying myself off: and a person needed to be
made for me, if I was to bestow attention on him. Directly the reverse was the conduct
of my niece. I never saw her give a poor man money: whatever sheobtained from me
for this purpose, she failed not in the first place to change for some necessary article.
Never did she seem more lovely in my eyes, than when rummaging my clothespresses: she was always sure to light on something which I did not wear and did not
need; to sew these old cast-off articles together, and put them on some ragged child,
she thought her highest happiness.
Her sister's turn of mind appeared already different: she had much of her mother; she
promised to become very elegant and beautiful, and she now bids fair to keep her
promise. She is greatly taken up with her exterior: from her earliest years she could
decorate and carry herself in a way that struck you. I still remember with what ecstasy,
when quite a little creature, she saw herself in a mirror, decked in certain precious
pearls, once my mother's, which she had by chance discovered, and made me try upon
her.
Reflecting on these diverse inclinations, it was pleasant for me to consider how my
property would, after my decease, be shared among them, and again called into use. I

saw the fowling-pieces of my father once more travelling round the fields on my
nephew's shoulder, and birds once more falling from his hunting-pouch: I saw my
whole wardrobe issuing from the church, at Easter Confirmation, on the persons of
tidy little girls; while the best pieces of it were employed to decorate some virtuous
burgher maiden on her marriage-day. In furnishing such children and poor little girls,
Natalia had a singular delight; though, as I must here remark, she showed not the
smallest love, or, if I may say it, smallest need, of a dependence upon any visible or
invisible Being, such as I had in my youth so strongly manifested.
When I also thought that the younger sister, on that same day, would wear my jewels
and pearls at court, I could see with peace my possessions, like my body, given back to
the elements.
The children waxed apace: to my comfort, they are healthy, handsome, clever
creatures. That my uncle keeps them from me, I endure without repining: when
staying in the neighborhood, or even in town, they seldom see me.
A singular personage, regarded as a French clergyman, though no one rightly knows his
history, has been intrusted with the oversight of all these children. He has them taught
in various places: they are put to board now here, now there.
At first I could perceive no plan whatever in this mode of education; till at last our
doctor told me the abbé had convinced my uncle, that, in order to accomplish any
thing by education, we must first become acquainted with the pupil's tendencies and
wishes; that, these once ascertained, he ought to be transported to a situation where
he may, as speedily as possible, content the former and attain the latter, and so, if he
have been mistaken, may still in time perceive his error, and at last, having found what
suits him, may hold the faster by it, may the more diligently fashion himself according
to it. I wish this strange experiment may prosper: with such excellent natures it is,
perhaps, possible.
But there is one peculiarity in these instructors, which I never shall approve of: they
study to seclude the children from whatever might awaken them to an acquaintance
with themselves and with the invisible, sole, faithful Friend. I often take it ill of my
uncle, that, on this account, he considers me dangerous for the little ones. Thus in
practice there is no man tolerant! Many assure us that they willingly leave each to take
his own way, yet all endeavor to exclude from action every one that does not think as
they do.

This removal of the children troubles me the more, the more I am convinced of the
reality of my belief. How can it fail to have a heavenly origin, an actual object, when in
practice it is so effectual? Is it not by practice alone that we prove our own existence?
Why, then, may we not, by a like mode, prove to ourselves the influence of that Power
who gives us all good things?
That I am still advancing, never retrograding; that my conduct is approximating more
and more to the image I have formed of perfection; that I every day feel more facility
in doing what I reckon proper, even while the weakness of my body so obstructs me,—
can all this be accounted for upon the principles of human nature, whose corruption I
have so clearly seen into? For me, at least, it cannot.
I scarcely remember a commandment: to me there is nothing that assumes the aspect
of law; it is an impulse that leads me, and guides me always aright. I freely follow my
emotions, and know as little of constraint as of repentance. God be praised that I know
to whom I am indebted for such happiness, and that I cannot think of it without
humility! There is no danger I should ever become proud of what I myself can do or
can forbear to do: I have seen too well what a monster might be formed and nursed in
every human bosom, did not higher Influence restrain us.

BOOK VII.
CHAPTER I.
Spring had come in all its brilliancy; a storm that had been lowering all day went
fiercely down upon the hills; the rain drew back into the country; the sun came forth in
all its splendor, and upon the dark vapor rose the lordly rainbow. Wilhelm was riding
towards it: the sight made him sad. "Ah!" said he within himself, "must it be that the
fairest hues of life appear to us only on a ground of black? And must drops fall, if we
are to be enraptured? A bright day is like a dull day, if we look at it unmoved; and what
can move us but some silent hope that the inborn inclination of our soul shall not
always be without an object? The recital of a noble action moves us; the sight of every
thing harmonious moves us: we feel then as if we were not altogether in a foreign
land; we fancy we are nearer the home towards which our best and inmost wishes
impatiently strive."
Meanwhile a pedestrian overtook him, and, walking with a stout step by the side of
the horse, began to keep him company. After a few common words, he looked at the
rider, and said, "If I am not mistaken, I must have already seen you somewhere."
"I, too, remember you," said Wilhelm: "had we not some time ago a pleasant sail
together?"—"Right!" replied the other.
Wilhelm looked at him more narrowly, then, after a pause, observed, "I do not know
what alteration has occurred in you. Last time we met, I took you for a Lutheran
country clergyman: you now seem to me more like a Catholic priest."
"To-day, at least, you are not wrong," replied the other, taking off his hat, and showing
him the tonsure. "Where is your company gone? Did you stay long with them?"
"Longer than was good: on looking back upon the period which I passed in their
society, it seems as if I looked into an endless void; nothing of it has remained with
me."
"Here you are mistaken," said the stranger: "every thing that happens to us leaves
some trace behind it; every thing contributes imperceptibly to form us. Yet often it is
dangerous to take a strict account of that. For either we grow proud and negligent, or
downcast and dispirited; and both are equally injurious in their consequences. The safe

plan is, always simply to do the task that lies nearest us; and this in the present case,"
added he, with a smile, "is to hasten to our quarters."
Wilhelm asked how far Lothario's house was distant: the stranger answered that it lay
behind the hill. "Perhaps I shall meet you there," continued he: "I have merely a small
affair to manage in the neighborhood. Farewell till then!" And, with this, he struck into
a steep path that seemed to lead more speedily across the hill.
"Yes, the man is right!" said Wilhelm to himself, as he proceeded: "we should think of
what is nearest; and for me, at present, there is nothing nearer than the mournful
errand I have come to do. Let me see whether I can still repeat the speech, which is to
put that cruel man to shame."
He then began reciting to himself this piece of oratory: not a syllable was wanting; and
the more his recollection served him, the higher grew his passion and his courage.
Aurelia's sorrows and her death were vividly present to his soul.
"Spirit of my friend!" exclaimed he, "hover round me, and, if thou canst, give some sign
to me that thou art softened, art appeased!"
Amid such words and meditations, he had reached the summit of the hill; and, near
the foot of its declivity, he now beheld a curious building, which he at once took to be
Lothario's dwelling. An old, irregular castle, with several turrets and peaked roofs,
appeared to have been the primitive erection; but the new additions to it, placed near
the main structure, looked still more irregular. A part of them stood close upon the
main edifice: others, at some distance, were combined with it by galleries and covered
passages. All external symmetry, every shade of architectural beauty, appeared to
have been sacrificed to the convenience of the interior. No trace of wall or trench was
to be seen; none of avenues or artificial gardens. A fruit and pot-herb garden reached
to the very buildings, and little patches of a like sort showed themselves even in the
intermediate spaces. A cheerful village lay at no great distance: the fields and gardens
everywhere appeared in the highest state of cultivation.
Sunk in his own impassioned feelings, Wilhelm rode along, not thinking much of what
he saw: he put up his horse at an inn, and, not without emotion, hastened to the
castle.


IPHIGENIA IN TAURIS








BY
JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
IPHIGENIA IN TAURIS.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
IPHIGENIA.
THOAS, King of the Taurians.
ORESTES.
PYLADES.
ARKAS.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE I.
A Grove before the Temple of Diana.
IPHIGENIA.
Beneath your leafy gloom, ye waving boughs
Of this old, shady, consecrated grove,
As in the goddess' silent sanctuary,
With the same shudd'ring feeling forth I step,
As when I trod it first, nor ever here
Doth my unquiet spirit feel at home.
Long as the mighty will, to which I bow,
Hath kept me here conceal'd, still, as at first,
I feel myself a stranger. For the sea
Doth sever me, alas! from those I love,
And day by day upon the shore I stand,
My soul still seeking for the land of Greece.
But to my sighs, the hollow-sounding waves
Bring, save their own hoarse murmurs, no reply.
Alas for him! who friendless and alone,
Remote from parents and from brethren dwells;
From him grief snatches every coming joy
Ere it doth reach his lip. His restless thoughts
Revert for ever to his father's halls,
Where first to him the radiant sun unclos'd
The gates of heav'n; where closer, day by day,
Brothers and sisters, leagu'd in pastime sweet,
Around each other twin'd the bonds of love.
I will not judge the counsel of the gods;
Yet, truly, woman's lot doth merit pity.
Man rules alike at home and in the field,
Nor is in foreign climes without resource;
Possession gladdens him, him conquest crowns,
And him an honourable death awaits.
How circumscrib'd is woman's destiny!
Obedience to a harsh, imperious lord,
Her duty, and her comfort; sad her fate,
Whom hostile fortune drives to lands remote:
Thus I, by noble Thoas, am detain'd,
Bound with a heavy, though a sacred chain.
Oh! with what shame, Diana, I confess
That with repugnance I perform these rites
For thee, divine protectress! unto whom
I would in freedom dedicate my life.
In thee, Diana, I have always hop'd,
And still I hope in thee, who didst infold
Within the holy shelter of thine arm
The outcast daughter of the mighty king.
Daughter of Jove! hast thou from ruin'd Troy
Led back in triumph to his native land
The mighty man, whom thou didst sore afflict,
His daughter's life in sacrifice demanding,—
Hast thou for him, the godlike Agamemnon,
Who to thine altar led his darling child,
Preserv'd his wife, Electra, and his son.
His dearest treasures?—then at length restore
Thy suppliant also to her friends and home,
And save her, as thou once from death didst save,
So now, from living here, a second death.
SCENE II.
IPHIGENIA. ARKAS.
ARKAS.
The king hath sent me hither, and commands
To hail Diana's priestess. This the day,
On which for new and wonderful success,
Tauris her goddess thanks. The king and host
Draw near,—I come to herald their approach.
IPHIGENIA.
We are prepar'd to give them worthy greeting;
Our goddess doth behold with gracious eye
The welcome sacrifice from Thoas' hand.
ARKAS.
Oh, priestess, that thine eye more mildly beam'd,—
Thou much-rever'd one,—that I found thy glance,
O consecrated maid, more calm, more bright,
To all a happy omen! Still doth grief,
With gloom mysterious, shroud thy inner mind;
Still, still, through many a year we wait in vain
For one confiding utt'rance from thy breast.
Long as I've known thee in this holy place,
That look of thine hath ever made me shudder;
And, as with iron bands, thy soul remains
Lock'd in the deep recesses of thy breast.
IPHIGENIA.
As doth become the exile and the orphan.
ARKAS.
Dost thou then here seem exil'd and an orphan?
IPHIGENIA.
Can foreign scenes our fatherland replace?
ARKAS.
Thy fatherland is foreign now to thee.
IPHIGENIA.
Hence is it that my bleeding heart ne'er heals.
In early youth, when first my soul, in love,
Held father, mother, brethren fondly twin'd,
A group of tender germs, in union sweet,
We sprang in beauty from the parent stem,
And heavenward grew. An unrelenting curse
Then seiz'd and sever'd me from those I lov'd,
And wrench'd with iron grasp the beauteous bands.
It vanish'd then, the fairest charm of youth,
The simple gladness of life's early dawn;
Though sav'd, I was a shadow of myself,
And life's fresh joyance bloom'd in me no more.
ARKAS.
If thus thou ever dost lament thy fate,
I must accuse thee of ingratitude.
IPHIGENIA.
Thanks have you ever.
ARKAS.
Not the honest thanks
Which prompt the heart to offices of love;
The joyous glance, revealing to the host
A grateful spirit, with its lot content.
When thee a deep mysterious destiny
Brought to this sacred fane, long years ago.
To greet thee, as a treasure sent from heaven,
With reverence and affection, Thoas came.
Benign and friendly was this shore to thee,
Which had before each stranger's heart appall'd,
For, till thy coming, none e'er trod our realm
But fell, according to an ancient rite,
A bloody victim at Diana's shrine.
IPHIGENIA.
Freely to breathe alone is not to live.
Say, is it life, within this holy fane,
Like a poor ghost around its sepulchre
To linger out my days? Or call you that
A life of conscious happiness and joy,
When every hour, dream'd listlessly away,
Leads to those dark and melancholy days,
Which the sad troop of the departed spend
In self-forgetfulness on Lethe's shore?
A useless life is but an early death;
This, woman's lot, is eminently mine.
ARKAS.
I can forgive, though I must needs deplore,
The noble pride which underrates itself
It robs thee of the happiness of life.
And hast thou, since thy coming here, done nought?
Who cheer'd the gloomy temper of the king?
Who hath with gentle eloquence annull'd,
From year to year, the usage of our sires,
By which, a victim at Diana's shrine,
Each stranger perish'd, thus from certain death
Sending so oft the rescued captive home?
Hath not Diana, harbouring no revenge
For this suspension of her bloody rites,
In richest measure heard thy gentle prayer?
On joyous pinions o'er the advancing host,
Doth not triumphant conquest proudly soar?
And feels not every one a happier lot,Since
Thoas, who so long hath guided us
With wisdom and with valour, sway'd by thee,
The joy of mild benignity approves,
Which leads him to relax the rigid claims
Of mute submission? Call thyself useless!
Thou,Thou, from whose being o'er a thousand hearts,
A healing balsam flows? when to a race.
To whom a god consign'd thee, thou dost prove
A fountain of perpetual happiness,
And from this dire inhospitable shore
Dost to the stranger grant a safe return?
IPHIGENIA.
The little done doth vanish to the mind,
Which forward sees how much remains to do.
ARKAS.
Him dost thou praise, who underrates his deeds?
IPHIGENIA.
Who estimates his deeds is justly blam'd.
ARKAS.
We blame alike, who proudly disregard
Their genuine merit, and who vainly prize
Their spurious worth too highly. Trust me, priestess,
And hearken to the counsel of a man
With honest zeal devoted to thy service:
When Thoas comes to-day to speak with thee,
Lend to his purpos'd words a gracious ear.
IPHIGENIA.
The well-intention'd counsel troubles me:
His offer studiously I've sought to shun.
ARKAS.
Thy duty and thy interest calmly weigh.
Since the king lost his son, he trusts but few,
Nor those as formerly. Each noble's son
He views with jealous eye as his successor;
He dreads a solitary, helpless age,
Or rash rebellion, or untimely death.
A Scythian studies not the rules of speech,
And least of all the king. He who is used
To act and to command, knows not the art,
From far, with subtle tact, to guide discourse
Through many windings to its destin'd goal.
Do not embarrass him with shy reserve
And studied misconception: graciously,
And with submission, meet the royal wish.
IPHIGENIA.
Shall I then speed the doom that threatens me?
ARKAS.
His gracious offer canst thou call a threat?
IPHIGENIA.
'Tis the most terrible of all to me.
ARKAS.
For his affection grant him confidence.
IPHIGENIA.
If he will first redeem my soul from fear.
ARKAS.
Why dost thou hide from him thy origin?
IPHIGENIA.
A priestess secrecy doth well become.
ARKAS.
Nought to our monarch should a secret be;
And, though he doth not seek to fathom thine,
His noble nature feels, ay, deeply feels,
That studiously thou hid'st thyself from him.
IPHIGENIA.
Displeasure doth he harbour 'gainst me, then?
ARKAS.
Almost it seems so. True, he speaks not of thee.
But casual words have taught me that the wish
To call thee his hath firmly seiz'd his soul;
Oh, do not leave the monarch to himself!
Lest his displeasure, rip'ning in his breast,
Should work thee woe, so with repentance thou
Too late my faithful counsel shalt recall.
IPHIGENIA.
How! doth the monarch purpose what no man
Of noble mind, who loves his honest name,
Whose bosom reverence for the gods restrains,
Would ever think of? Will he force employ
To tear me from this consecrated fane?
Then will I call the gods, and chiefly thee,
Diana, goddess resolute, to aid me;
Thyself a virgin, thou'lt a virgin shield,
And succour to thy priestess gladly yield.
ARKAS.
Be tranquil! Passion, and youth's fiery blood
Impel not Thoas rashly to commit
A deed so lawless. In his present mood,
I fear from him another harsh resolve,
Which (for his soul is steadfast and unmov'd,)
He then will execute without delay.
Therefore I pray thee, canst thou grant no more,
At least be grateful—give thy confidence.
IPHIGENIA.
Oh tell me what is further known to thee.
ARKAS.
Learn it from him. I see the king approach;
Thou honour'st him, and thy own heart will prompt thee
To meet him kindly and with confidence.
A noble man by woman's gentle word
May oft be led.
IPHIGENIA, alone.
I see not how I can
Follow the counsel of my faithful friend.
But willingly the duty I perform
Of giving thanks for benefits receiv'd,
And much I wish that to the king my lips
With truth could utter what would please his ear.
SCENE III.
IPHIGENIA. THOAS.
IPHIGENIA.
Her royal gifts the goddess shower on thee!
Imparting conquest, wealth, and high renown,
Dominion, and the welfare of thy house,
With the fulfilment of each pious wish,
That thou, who over numbers rul'st supreme,
Thyself may'st be supreme in happiness!
THOAS.
Contented were I with my people's praise;
My conquests others more than I enjoy.
Oh! be he king or subject, he's most blest,
Who in his home finds happiness and peace.
Thou shar'dst my sorrow, when a hostile sword
Tore from my side my last, my dearest son;
Long as fierce vengeance occupied my heart,
I did not feel my dwelling's dreary void;
But now, returning home, my rage appeas'd,
My foes defeated, and my son aveng'd,
I find there nothing left to comfort me.
The glad obedience, which I used to see
Kindling in every eye, is smother'd now
In discontent and gloom; each, pond'ring, weighs
The changes which a future day may bring,
And serves the childless king, because compell'd.
To-day I come within this sacred fane,
Which I have often enter'd to implore
And thank the gods for conquest. In my breast
I bear an old and fondly-cherish'd wish.
To which methinks thou canst not be a stranger;
Thee, maid, a blessing to myself and realm,
I hope, as bride, to carry to my home.
IPHIGENIA.
Too great thine offer, king, to one unknown;
Abash'd the fugitive before thee stands,
Who on this shore sought only what thou gav'st,
Safety and peace.
THOAS.
Thus still to shroud thyself
From me, as from the lowest, in the veil
Of mystery which wrapp'd thy coming here,
Would in no country be deem'd just or right.
Strangers this shore appall'd; 'twas so ordain'd
Alike by law and stern necessity.
From thee alone—a kindly welcom'd guest,
Who hast enjoy'd each hallow'd privilege,
And spent thy days in freedom unrestrain'd—
From thee I hop'd that confidence to gain
Which every faithful host may justly claim.
IPHIGENIA.
If I conceal'd, O king, my name, my race,
'Twas fear that prompted me, and not mistrust.
For didst thou know who stands before thee now,
And what accursed head thy arm protects,
A shudd'ring horror would possess thy heart;
And, far from wishing me to share thy throne,
Thou, ere the time appointed, from thy realm
Wouldst banish me perchance, and thrust me forth,
Before a glad reunion with my friends
And period to my wand'rings is ordain'd,
To meet that sorrow, which in every clime,
With cold, inhospitable, fearful hand,
Awaits the outcast, exil'd from his home.
THOAS.
Whate'er respecting thee the gods decree,
Whate'er their doom for thee and for thy house,
Since thou hast dwelt amongst us, and enjoy'd
The privilege the pious stranger claims,
To me hath fail'd no blessing sent from Heaven;
And to persuade me, that protecting thee
I shield a guilty head, were hard indeed.
IPHIGENIA.
Thy bounty, not the guest, draws blessings down.
THOAS.
The kindness shown the wicked is not blest.
End then thy silence, priestess; not unjust
Is he who doth demand it. In my hands
The goddess plac'd thee; thou hast been to me
As sacred as to her, and her behest
Shall for the future also be my law.
If thou canst hope in safety to return
Back to thy kindred, I renounce my claims:
But is thy homeward path for ever clos'd—
Or doth thy race in hopeless exile rove,
Or lie extinguish'd by some mighty woe—
Then may I claim thee by more laws than one.
Speak openly, thou know'st I keep my word.
IPHIGENIA.
Its ancient bands reluctantly my tongue
Doth loose, a long-hid secret to divulge;
For once imparted, it resumes no more
The safe asylum of the inmost heart,
But thenceforth, as the powers above decree,
Doth work its ministry of weal or woe.
Attend! I issue from the Titan's race.
THOAS.
A word momentous calmly hast thou spoken.
Him nam'st thou ancestor whom all the world
Knows as a sometime favourite of the gods?
Is it that Tantalus, whom Jove himself
Drew to his council and his social board?
On whose experienc'd words, with wisdom fraught,
As on the language of an oracle,E'en gods delighted hung?
IPHIGENIA.
'Tis even he;
But gods should not hold intercourse with men
As with themselves. Too weak the human race,
Not to grow dizzy on unwonted heights.
Ignoble was he not, and no betrayer;
To be the Thunderer's slave, he was too great:
To be his friend and comrade,—but a man.
His crime was human, and their doom severe;
For poets sing, that treachery and pride
Did from Jove's table hurl him headlong down,
To grovel in the depths of Tartarus.
Alas, and his whole race their hate pursues.
THOAS.
Bear they their own guilt, or their ancestors'?
IPHIGENIA.
The Titan's mighty breast and nervous frame
Was his descendant's certain heritage;
But round their brow Jove forg'd a band of brass.
Wisdom and patience, prudence and restraint,
He from their gloomy, fearful eye conceal'd;
In them each passion grew to savage rage,
And headlong rush'd uncheck'd. The Titan's son,
The strong-will'd Pelops, won his beauteous bride,
Hippodamia, child of Œnomaus,
Through treachery and murder; she ere long
Bore him two children, Atreus and Thyestes;
With envy they beheld the growing love
Their father cherish'd for a first-born son
Sprung from another union. Bound by hate,
In secret they contrive their brother's death.
The sire, the crime imputing to his wife,
With savage fury claim'd from her his child,
And she in terror did destroy herself—
THOAS.
Thou'rt silent? Pause not in thy narrative!
Do not repent thy confidence—say on!
IPHIGENIA.
How blest is he who his progenitors
With pride remembers, to the list'ner tells
The story of their greatness, of their deeds,
And, silently rejoicing, sees himself
Link'd to this goodly chain! For the same stock
Bears not the monster and the demigod:
A line, or good or evil, ushers in
The glory or the terror of the world.—
After the death of Pelops, his two sons
Rul'd o'er the city with divided sway.
But such an union could not long endure.
His brother's honour first Thyestes wounds.
In vengeance Atreus drove him from the realm.
Thyestes, planning horrors, long before
Had stealthily procur'd his brother's son,
Whom he in secret nurtur'd as his own.
Revenge and fury in his breast he pour'd,
Then to the royal city sent him forth,
That in his uncle he might slay his sire,
The meditated murder was disclos'd,
And by the king most cruelly aveng'd,
Who slaughter'd, as he thought, his brother's son.
Too late he learn'd whose dying tortures met
His drunken gaze; and seeking to assuage
The insatiate vengeance that possess'd his soul,
He plann'd a deed unheard of. He assum'd
A friendly tone, seem'd reconcil'd, appeas'd.
And lur'd his brother, with his children twain,
Back to his kingdom; these he seiz'd and slew;
Then plac'd the loathsome and abhorrent food
At his first meal before the unconscious sire.
And when Thyestes had his hunger still'd
With his own flesh, a sadness seiz'd his soul;
He for his children ask'd,—their steps, their voice,
Fancied he heard already at the door;
And Atreus, grinning with malicious joy,
Threw in the members of the slaughter'd boys.—
Shudd'ring, O king, thou dost avert thy face:
So did the sun his radiant visage hide,
And swerve his chariot from the eternal path.
These, monarch, are thy priestess' ancestors,
And many a dreadful fate of mortal doom,
And many a deed of the bewilder'd brain,
Dark night doth cover with her sable wing,
Or shroud in gloomy twilight.
THOAS.
Hidden there
Let them abide. A truce to horror now,
And tell me by what miracle thou sprang'st
From race so savage.
IPHIGENIA.
Atreus' eldest son
Was Agamemnon; he, O king, my sire:
But I may say with truth, that, from a child,
In him the model of a perfect man
I witness'd ever. Clytemnestra bore
To him, myself, the firstling of their love,
Electra then. Peaceful the monarch rul'd,
And to the house of Tantalus was given
A long-withheld repose. A son alone
Was wanting to complete my parent's bliss;
Scarce was this wish fulfill'd, and young Orestes,
The household's darling, with his sisters grew,
When new misfortunes vex'd our ancient house.
To you hath come the rumour of the war,
Which, to avenge the fairest woman's wrongs,
The force united of the Grecian kings
Round Ilion's walls encamp'd. Whether the town
Was humbl'd, and achiev'd their great revenge
I have not heard. My father led the host
In Aulis vainly for a favouring gale
They waited; for, enrag'd against their chief,
Diana stay'd their progress, and requir'd,
Through Chaleas' voice, the monarch's eldest daughter.
They lur'd me with my mother to the camp,
And at Diana's altar doom'd this head.—
She was appeas'd, she did not wish my blood,
And wrapt me in a soft protecting cloud;
Within this temple from the dream of death
I waken'd first. Yes, I myself am she;
Iphigenia,—I who speak to thee
Am Atreus' grandchild, Agamemnon's child,
And great Diana's consecrated priestess.
THOAS.
I yield no higher honour or regard
To the king's daughter than the maid unknown;
Once more my first proposal I repeat;
Come, follow me, and share what I possess.
IPHIGENIA.
How dare I venture such a step, O king?
Hath not the goddess who protected me
Alone a right to my devoted head?
'Twas she who chose for me this sanctuary,
Where she perchance reserves me for my sire,
By my apparent death enough chastis'd,
To be the joy and solace of his age.
Perchance my glad return is near; and how
If I, unmindful of her purposes,
Had here attach'd myself against her will?
I ask'd a signal, did she wish my stay.
THOAS.
The signal is that still thou tarriest here.
Seek not evasively such vain pretexts.
Not many words are needed to refuse,
By the refus'd the no alone is heard.
IPHIGENIA.
Mine are not words meant only to deceive;
I have to thee my inmost heart reveal'd.
And doth no inward voice suggest to thee,
How I with yearning soul must pine to see
My father, mother, and my long-lost home?
Oh let thy vessels bear me thither, king!
That in the ancient halls, where sorrow still
In accents low doth fondly breathe my name,
Joy, as in welcome of a new-born child,
May round the columns twine the fairest wreath.
Thou wouldst to me and mine new life impart.
THOAS.
Then go! the promptings of thy heart obey;
Despise the voice of reason and good counsel.
Be quite the woman, sway'd by each desire,
That bridleless impels her to and fro.
When passion rages fiercely in her breast,
No sacred tie withholds her from the wretch
Who would allure her to forsake for him
A husband's or a father's guardian arms;
Extinct within her heart its fiery glow,
The golden tongue of eloquence in vain
With words of truth and power assails her ear.
IPHIGENIA.
Remember now, O king, thy noble words!
My trust and candour wilt thou thus repay?
Thou seem'dst, methought, prepar'd to hear the truth.
THOAS.
For this unlook'd-for answer not prepar'd.
Yet 'twas to be expected; knew I not
That 'twas with woman I had now to deal?
IPHIGENIA.
Upbraid not thus, O king, our feeble sex!
Though not in dignity to match with yours,
The weapons woman wields are not ignoble.
And trust me, Thoas, in thy happiness
I have a deeper insight than thyself.
Thou thinkest, ignorant alike of both,
A closer union would augment our bliss;
Inspir'd with confidence and honest zeal
Thou strongly urgest me to yield consent;
And here I thank the gods, who give me strength
To shun a doom unratified by them.
THOAS.
'Tis not a god, 'tis thine own heart that speaks.
IPHIGENIA.
'Tis through the heart alone they speak to us.
THOAS.
To hear them have I not an equal right?
IPHIGENIA.
The raging tempest drowns the still, small voice.
THOAS.
This voice no doubt the priestess hears alone.
IPHIGENIA.
Before all others should the prince attend it.
THOAS.
Thy sacred office, and ancestral right
To Jove's own table, place thee with the gods
In closer union than an earth-born savage.
IPHIGENIA.
Thus must I now the confidence atone
Thyself extorted from me!
THOAS.
I'm a man,And better 'tis we end this conference.
Hear then my last resolve. Be priestess still
Of the great goddess who selected thee;
And may she pardon me, that I from her,
Unjustly and with secret self-reproach,
Her ancient sacrifice so long withheld.
From olden times no stranger near'd our shore
But fell a victim at her sacred shrine.
But thou, with kind affection (which at times
Seem'd like a gentle daughter's tender love,
At times assum'd to my enraptur'd heart
The modest inclination of a bride),
Didst so inthral me, as with magic bonds,
That I forgot my duty. Thou didst rock
My senses in a dream: I did not hear
My people's murmurs: now they cry aloud,
Ascribing my poor son's untimely death
To this my guilt. No longer for thy sake
Will I oppose the wishes of the crowd,
Who urgently demand the sacrifice.
IPHIGENIA.
For mine own sake I ne'er desired it from thee.
Who to the gods ascribe a thirst for blood
Do misconceive their nature, and impute
To them their own inhuman dark desires.
Did not Diana snatch me from the priest,
Preferring my poor service to my death?
THOAS.
'Tis not for us, on reason's shifting grounds,
Lightly to guide and construe rites divine.
Perform thy duty; I'll accomplish mine.
Two strangers, whom in caverns of the shore
We found conceal'd, and whose arrival here
Bodes to my realm no good, are in my power.
With them thy goddess may once more resume
Her ancient, pious, long-suspended rites!
I send them here,—thy duty not unknown.
[Exit.
IPHIGENIA, alone.
Gracious protectress! thou hast clouds
To shelter innocence distress'd,
And genial gales from Fate's rude grasp,
Safely to waft her o'er the sea,
O'er the wide earth's remotest realms,
Where'er it seemeth good to thee.
Wise art thou,—thine all-seeing eye
The future and the past surveys,
And doth on all thy children rest,
E'en as thy pure and guardian light
Keeps o'er the earth its silent watch,
The beauty and the life of night.
O Goddess! keep my hands from blood!
Blessing it never brings, nor peace;
And still in evil hours the form
Of the chance-murder'd man appears
To fill the unwilling murderer's soul
With horrible and gloomy fears.
For fondly the Immortals view
Man's widely-scatter'd, simple race;
And the poor mortal's transient life
Gladly prolong, that he may raise
Awhile to their eternal heavens
His sympathetic joyous gaze.
ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE I.
ORESTES. PYLADES.
ORESTES.
It is the path of death that now we tread:
At every step my soul grows more serene.
When I implor'd Apollo to remove
The grisly band of Furies from my side,
He seem'd, with hope-inspiring, godlike words,
To promise aid and safety in the fane
Of his lov'd sister, who o'er Tauris rules.
Thus the prophetic word fulfils itself,
That with my life shall terminate my woe.
How easy 'tis for me, whose heart is crush'd,
Whose sense is deaden'd by a hand divine,
Thus to renounce the beauteous light of day!
And must the son of Atreus not entwine
The wreath of conquest round his dying brow—
Must I, as my forefathers, as my sire,
Bleed like a victim,—an ignoble death—
So be it! Better at the altar here,
Than in a nook obscure, where kindred hands
Have spread assassination's wily net.
Yield me this brief repose, infernal Powers!
Ye, who, like loosen'd hounds, still scent the blood,
Which, trickling from my feet, betrays my path.
Leave me! ere long I come to you below.
Nor you, nor I, should view the light of day.
The soft green carpet of the beauteous earth
Is no arena for unhallow'd fiends.
Below I seek you, where an equal fate
Binds all in murky, never-ending night.
Thee only, thee, my Pylades, my friend,
The guiltless partner of my crime and curse,
Thee am I loath, before thy time, to take
To yonder cheerless shore! Thy life or death
Alone awakens in me hope or fear.
PYLADES.
Like thee, Orestes, I am not prepar'd
Downwards to wander to yon realm of shade.
I purpose still, through the entangl'd paths,
Which seem as they would lead to blackest night,
Again to guide our upward way to life.
Of death I think not; I observe and mark
Whether the gods may not perchance present
Means and fit moment for a joyful flight.
Dreaded or not, the stroke of death must come;
And though the priestess stood with hand uprais'd,
Prepar'd to cut our consecrated locks,
Our safety still should be my only thought:
Uplift thy soul above this weak despair;
Desponding doubts but hasten on our peril.
Apollo pledg'd to us his sacred word,
That in his sister's' holy fane for thee
Were comfort, aid, and glad return prepar'd.
The words of Heaven are not equivocal,
As in despair the poor oppress'd one thinks.
ORESTES.
The mystic web of life my mother spread
Around my infant head, and so I grew,
An image of my sire; and my mute look
Was aye a bitter and a keen reproof
To her and base Ægisthus. Oh, how oft,
When silently within our gloomy hall
Electra sat, and mus'd beside the fire,
Have I with anguish'd spirit climb'd her knee,
And watch'd her bitter tears with sad amaze!
Then would she tell me of our noble sire:
How much I long'd to see him—be with him!
Myself at Troy one moment fondly wish'd,
My sire's return, the next. The day arrived—
PYLADES.
Oh, of that awful hour let fiends of hell
Hold nightly converse! Of a time more fair
May the remembrance animate our hearts
To fresh heroic deeds. The gods require
On this wide earth the service of the good,
To work their pleasure. Still they count on thee;
For in thy father's train they sent thee not,
When he to Orcus went unwilling down.
ORESTES.
Would I had seiz'd the border of his robe.
And follow'd him!
PYLADES.
They kindly car'd for me
Who here detain'd thee; for if thou hadst died
I know not what had then become of me;
Since I with thee, and for thy sake alone,
Have from my childhood liv'd, and wish to live.
ORESTES.
Do not remind me of those tranquil days,
When me thy home a safe asylum gave;
With fond solicitude thy noble sire
The half-nipp'd, tender flow'ret gently rear'd;
While thou a friend and playmate always gay,
Like to a light and brilliant butterfly
Around a dusky flower, didst around me
Still with new life thy merry gambols play,
And breathe thy joyous spirit in my soul,
Until, my cares forgetting, I with thee
Was lur'd to snatch the eager joys of youth.
PYLADES.
My very life began when thee I lov'd.
ORESTES.
Say, then thy woes began, and thou speak'st truly.
This is the sharpest sorrow of my lot,
That, like a plague-infected wretch, I bear
Death and destruction hid within my breast;
That, where I tread, e'en on the healthiest spot,
Ere long the blooming faces round betray
The writhing features of a ling'ring death.
PYLADES.
Were thy breath venom, I had been the first
To die that death, Orestes. Am I not,
As ever, full of courage and of joy?
And love and courage are the spirit's wings
Wafting to noble actions.
ORESTES.
Noble actions?
Time was, when fancy painted such before us!
When oft, the game pursuing, on we roam'd
O'er hill and valley; hoping that ere long
With club and weapon arm'd, we so might track
The robber to his den, or monster huge.
And then at twilight, by the glassy sea,
We peaceful sat, reclin'd against each other
The waves came dancing to our very feet.
And all before us lay the wide, wide world.
Then on a sudden one would seize his sword,
And future deeds shone round us like the stars,
Which gemm'd in countless throngs the vault of night.
PYLADES.
Endless, my friend, the projects which the soul
Burns to accomplish. We would every deed
At once perform as grandly as it shows
After long ages, when from land to land
The poet's swelling song hath roll'd it on.
It sounds so lovely what our fathers did,
When, in the silent evening shade reclin'd,
We drink it in with music's melting tones;
And what we do is, as their deeds to them,
Toilsome and incomplete!
Thus we pursue what always flies before;
We disregard the path in which we tread,
Scarce see around the footsteps of our sires,
Or heed the trace of their career on earth.
We ever hasten on to chase their shades,
Which godlike, at a distance far remote,
On golden clouds reclin'd, the mountains crown.
The man I prize not who esteems himself
Just as the people's breath may chance to raise him.
But thou, Orestes, to the gods give thanks,
That they have done so much through thee already.
ORESTES.
When they ordain a man to noble deeds,
To shield from dire calamity his friends,
Extend his empire, or protect its bounds,
Or put to flight its ancient enemies,
Let him be grateful! For to him a god
Imparts the first, the sweetest joy of life.
Me have they doom'd to be a slaughterer,
To be an honour'd mother's murderer,
And shamefully a deed of shame avenging.
Me through their own decree they have o'erwhelm'd.
Trust me, the race of Tantalus is doom'd;
Nor may his last descendant leave the earth,
Or crown'd with honour or unstain'd by crime.
PYLADES.
The gods avenge not on the son the deeds
Done by the father. Each, or good or bad,
Of his own actions reaps the due reward.
The parents' blessing, not their curse, descends.
ORESTES.
Methinks their blessing did not lead us here.
PYLADES.
It was at least the mighty gods' decree.
ORESTES.
Then is it their decree which doth destroy us.
PYLADES.
Perform what they command, and wait the event.
Do thou Apollo's sister bear from hence,
That they at Delphi may united dwell,
Rever'd and honour'd by a noble race:
Thee, for this deed, the heav'nly pair will view
With gracious eye, and from the hateful grasp
Of the infernal Powers will rescue thee.
E'en now none dares intrude within this grove.
ORESTES.
So shall I die at least a peaceful death.
PYLADES.
Far other are my thoughts, and not unskill'd
Have I the future and the past combin'd
In quiet meditation. Long, perchance,
Hath ripen'd in the counsel of the gods
The great event. Diana wish d to leave
This savage region foul with human blood.
We were selected for the high emprize;
To us it is assign'd, and strangely thus
We are conducted to the threshold here.
ORESTES.
My friend, with wondrous skill thou link'st thy wish
With the predestin'd purpose of the gods.
PYLADES.
Of what avail is prudence, if it fail
Heedful to mark the purposes of Heaven?
A noble man, who much hath sinn'd, some god
Doth summon to a dangerous enterprize,
Which to achieve appears impossible.
The hero conquers, and atoning serves
Mortals and gods, who thenceforth honour him.
ORESTES.
Am I foredoom'd to action and to life,
Would that a god from my distemper'd brain
Might chase this dizzy fever, which impels
My restless steps along a slipp'ry path,
Stain'd with a mother's blood, to direful death;
And pitying, dry the fountain, whence the blood,
For ever spouting from a mother's wounds,
Eternally defiles me!
PYLADES.
Wait in peace!
Thou dost increase the evil, and dost take
The office of the Furies on thyself.
Let me contrive,—be still! And when at length
The time for action claims our powers combin'd,
Then will I summon thee, and on we'll stride,
With cautious boldness to achieve the event.
ORESTES.
I hear Ulysses speak!
PYLADES.
Nay, mock me not.
Each must select the hero after whom
To climb the steep and difficult ascent
Of high Olympus. And to me it seems
That him nor stratagem nor art defile
Who consecrates himself to noble deeds.
ORESTES.
I most esteem the brave and upright man.
PYLADES.
And therefore have I not desir'd thy counsel.
One step is ta'en already: from our guards
I have extorted this intelligence.
A strange and godlike woman now restrains
The execution of that bloody law:
Incense, and prayer, and an unsullied heart,
These are the gifts she offers to the gods.
Her fame is widely spread, and it is thought
That from the race of Amazon she springs,
And hither fled some great calamity.
ORESTES.
Her gentle sway, it seems, lost all its power
At the approach of one so criminal,
Whom the dire curse enshrouds in gloomy night.
Our doom to seal, the pious thirst for blood
Again unchains the ancient cruel rite:
The monarch's savage will decrees our death;
A woman cannot save when he condemns.
PYLADES.
That 'tis a woman is a ground for hope!
A man, the very best, with cruelty
At length may so familiarize his mind,
His character through custom so transform,
That he shall come to make himself a law
Of what at first his very soul abhorr'd.
But woman doth retain the stamp of mind
She first assum'd. On her we may depend
In good or evil with more certainty.
She comes; leave us alone. I dare not tell
At once our names, nor unreserv'd confide
Our fortunes to her. Now retire awhile,
And ere she speaks with thee we'll meet again.
SCENE II.
IPHIGENIA. PYLADES.
IPHIGENIA.
Whence art thou? Stranger, speak! To me thy bearing
Stamps thee of Grecian, not of Scythian race.
(She unbinds his chains.)
The freedom that I give is dangerous:
The gods avert the doom that threatens you!
PYLADES.
Delicious music! dearly welcome tones
Of our own language in a foreign land!
With joy my captive eye once more beholds
The azure mountains of my native coast.
Oh, let this joy that I too am a Greek
Convince thee, priestess! How I need thine aid,
A moment I forget, my spirit wrapt
In contemplation of so fair a vision.
If fate's dread mandate doth not seal thy lips.
From which of our illustrious races, say,
Dost thou thy godlike origin derive?
IPHIGENIA.
A priestess, by the Goddess' self ordain'd
And consecrated too, doth speak with thee.
Let that suffice: but tell me, who art thou,
And what unbless'd o'erruling destiny
Hath hither led thee with thy friend?
PYLADES.
The woe,
Whose hateful presence ever dogs our steps,
I can with ease relate. Oh, would that thou
Couldst with like ease, divine one, shed on us
One ray of cheering hope! We are from Crete,
Adrastus' sons, and I, the youngest born,
Named Cephalus; my eldest brother, he,
Laodamus. Between us two a youth
Of savage temper grew, who oft disturb'd
The joy and concord of our youthful sports.
Long as our father led his powers at Troy,
Passive our mother's mandate we obey'd;
But when, enrich'd with booty, he return'd,
And shortly after died, a contest fierce
For the succession and their father's wealth,
Parted the brothers. I the eldest joined;
He slew the second; and the Furies hence
For kindred murder dog his restless steps.
But to this savage shore the Delphian god
Hath sent us, cheer'd by hope, commanding us
Within his sister's temple to await
The blessed hand of aid. We have been ta'en,
Brought hither, and now stand for sacrifice.
My tale is told.
IPHIGENIA.
Tell me, is Troy o'erthrown?
Assure me of its fall.
PYLADES.
It lies in ruins.
But oh, ensure deliverance to us!
Hasten, I pray, the promis'd aid of heav'n.
Pity my brother, say a kindly word;
But I implore thee, spare him when thou speakest.
Too easily his inner mind is torn
By joy, or grief, or cruel memory.
A feverish madness oft doth seize on him,
Yielding his spirit, beautiful and free,
A prey to furies.
IPHIGENIA.
Great as is thy woe,
Forget it, I conjure thee, for a while,
Till I am satisfied.
PYLADES.
The stately town,
Which ten long years withstood the Grecian host,
Now lies in ruins, ne'er to rise again;
Yet many a hero's grave will oft recall
Our sad remembrance to that barbarous shore;
There lies Achilles and his noble friend.
IPHIGENIA.
And are ye, godlike forms, reduc'd to dust!
PYLADES.
Nor Palamede, nor Ajax, ere again
The daylight of their native land behold.
IPHIGENIA.
He speaks not of my father, doth not name
Him with the fallen. He may yet survive!
I may behold him! still hope on, my heart!
PYLADES.
Yet happy are the thousands who receiv'd
Their bitter death-blow from a hostile hand!
For terror wild, and end most tragical,
Some hostile, angry, deity prepar'd,
Instead of triumph, for the home-returning.
Do human voices never reach this shore?
Far as their sound extends, they bear the fame
Of deeds unparallel'd. And is the woe
Which fills Mycene's halls with ceaseless sighs
To thee a secret still?—And know'st thou not
That Clytemnestra, with Ægisthus' aid,
Her royal consort artfully ensnar'd,
And murder'd on the day of his return?—
The monarch's house thou honourest! I perceive
Thy heaving bosom vainly doth contend
With tidings fraught with such unlook'd-for woe
Art thou the daughter of a friend? or born
Within the circuit of Mycene's walls?
Do not conceal it, nor avenge on me
That here the horrid crime I first announc'd.
IPHIGENIA.
Proceed, and tell me how the deed was done.
PYLADES.
The day of his return, as from the bath
Arose the monarch, tranquil and refresh'd.
His robe demanding from his consort's hand,
A tangl'd garment, complicate with folds.
She o'er his shoulders flung and noble head;
And when, as from a net, he vainly strove
To extricate himself, the traitor, base
Ægisthus, smote him, and envelop'd thus
Great Agamemnon sought the shades below.
IPHIGENIA.
And what reward receiv'd the base accomplice?
PYLADES.
A queen and kingdom he possess'd already.
IPHIGENIA.
Base passion prompted, then, the deed of shame?
PYLADES.
And feelings, cherish'd long, of deep revenge.
IPHIGENIA.
How had the monarch injured Clytemnestra?
PYLADES.
By such a dreadful deed, that if on earth
Aught could exculpate murder, it were this.
To Aulis he allur'd her, when the fleet
With unpropitious winds the goddess stay'd;
And there, a victim at Diana's shrine,
The monarch, for the welfare of the Greeks,
Her eldest daughter doom'd. And this, 'tis said,
Planted such deep abhorrence in her heart,
That to Ægisthus she resign'd herself,
And round her husband flung the web of death.
IPHIGENIA (veiling herself).
It is enough! Thou wilt again behold me.
PYLADES, alone.
The fortune of this royal house, it seems,
Doth move her deeply. Whosoe'er she be,
She must herself have known the monarch well;—
For our good fortune, from a noble house,
She hath been sold to bondage. Peace, my heart!
And let us steer our course with prudent zeal
Toward the star of hope which gleams upon us.
ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE I.
IPHIGENIA. ORESTES.
IPHIGENIA.
Unhappy man, I only loose thy bonds
In token of a still severer doom.
The freedom which the sanctuary imparts,
Like the last life-gleam o'er the dying face,
But heralds death. I cannot, dare not say
Your doom is hopeless; for, with murd'rous hand,
Could I inflict the fatal blow myself?
And while I here am priestess of Diana,
None, be he who he may, dare touch your heads.
But the incensed king, should I refuse
Compliance with the rites himself enjoin'd,
Will choose another virgin from my train
As my successor. Then, alas! with nought,
Save ardent wishes, can I succour you,
Much honour'd countryman! The humblest slave,
Who had but near'd our sacred household hearth,
Is dearly welcome in a foreign land;
How with proportion'd joy and blessing, then,
Shall I receive the man who doth recall
The image of the heroes, whom I learn'd
To honour from my parents, and who cheers
My inmost heart with flatt'ring gleams of hope!
ORESTES.
Does prudent forethought prompt thee to conceal
Thy name and race? or may I hope to know
Who, like a heavenly vision, meets me thus?
IPHIGENIA.
Yes, thou shalt know me. Now conclude the tale
Of which thy brother only told me half:
Relate their end, who coming home from Troy,
On their own threshold met a doom severe
And most unlook'd for. I, though but a child
When first conducted hither, well recall
The timid glance of wonder which I cast
On those heroic forms. When they went forth,
it seem'd as though Olympus from her womb
Had cast the heroes of a by-gone world,
To frighten Ilion; and, above them all,
Great Agamemnon tower'd pre-eminent!
Oh tell me! Fell the hero in his home,
Though Clytemnestra's and Ægisthus' wiles?
ORESTES.
He fell!
IPHIGENIA.
Unblest Mycene! Thus the sons
Of Tantalus, with barbarous hands, have sown
Curse upon curse; and, as the shaken weed
Scatters around a thousand poison-seeds,
So they assassins ceaseless generate,
Their children's children ruthless to destroy.—
Now tell the remnant of thy brother's tale,
Which horror darkly hid from me before.
How did the last descendant of the race,—
The gentle child, to whom the Gods assign'd
The office of avenger,—how did he
Escape that day of blood? Did equal fate
Around Orestes throw Avernus' net?
Say, was he saved? and is he still alive?
And lives Electra, too?
ORESTES.
They both survive.
IPHIGENIA.
Golden Apollo, lend thy choicest beams!
Lay them an offering at the throne of Jove!
For I am poor and dumb.
ORESTES.
If social bonds
Or ties more close connect thee with this house,
As this thy joy evinces, rein thy heart;
For insupportable the sudden plunge
From happiness to sorrow's gloomy depth.
As yet thou only know'st the hero's death.
IPHIGENIA.
And is not this intelligence enough?
ORESTES.
Half of the horror yet remains untold,
IPHIGENIA.
Electra and Orestes both survive,
What have I then to fear?
ORESTES.
And fear'st thou nought
For Clytemnestra?
IPHIGENIA.
Her, nor hope nor fear
Have power to save.
ORESTES.
She to the land of hope
Hath bid farewell.
IPHIGENIA.
Did her repentant hand
Shed her own blood?
ORESTES.
Not so; yet her own blood
Inflicted death.
IPHIGENIA.
Speak less ambiguously.
Uncertainty around my anxious head
Her dusky, thousand-folded, pinion waves.
ORESTES.
Have then the powers above selected me
To be the herald of a dreadful deed,
Which, in the drear and soundless realms of night,
I fain would hide for ever? 'Gainst my will
Thy gentle voice constrains me; it demands,
And shall receive, a tale of direst woe.
Electra, on the day when fell her sire,
Her brother from impending doom conceal'd;
Him Strophius, his father's relative,
With kindest care receiv'd, and rear'd the child
With his own son, named Pylades, who soon
Around the stranger twin'd the bonds of love.
And as they grew, within their inmost souls
There sprang the burning longing to revenge
The monarch's death. Unlookd for, and disguis'd,
They reach Mycene, feigning to have brought
The mournful tidings of Orestes' death,
Together with his ashes. Them the queen
Gladly receives. Within the house they enter;
Orestes to Electra shows himself:
She fans the fires of vengeance into flame,
Which in the sacred presence of a mother
Had burn'd more dimly. Silently she leads
Her brother to the spot where fell their sire;
Where lurid blood-marks, on the oft-wash'd floor,
With pallid streaks, anticipate revenge.
With fiery eloquence she pictures forth
Each circumstance of that atrocious deed,—
Her own oppress'd and miserable life,
The prosperous traitor's insolent demeanour,
The perils threat'ning Agamemnon's race
From her who had become their stepmother;
Then in his hand the ancient dagger thrusts,
Which often in the house of Tantalus
With savage fury rag'd,—and by her son
Is Clytemnestra slain.
IPHIGENIA.
Immortal powers!
Whose pure and blest existence glides away
'Mid ever shifting clouds, me have ye kept
So many years secluded from the world,
Retain'd me near yourselves, consign'd to me
The childlike task to feed the sacred fire,
And taught my spirit, like the hallow'd flame,
With never-clouded brightness to aspire
To your pure mansions,—but at length to feel
With keener woe the misery of my house?
Oh tell me of the poor unfortunate!
Speak of Orestes!
ORESTES.
Would that he were dead!
Forth from his mother's blood her ghost arose,
And to the ancient daughters of the night
Cries,—"Let him not escape,—the matricide!
Pursue the victim, dedicate to you!"
They hear, and glare around with hollow eyes,
Like greedy eagles. In their murky dens
They stir themselves, and from the corners creep
Their comrades, dire Remorse and pallid Fear;
Before them fumes a mist of Acheron;
Perplexingly around the murderer's brow
The eternal contemplation of the past
Rolls in its cloudy circles. Once again
The grisly band, commissioned to destroy,
Pollute earth's beautiful and heaven-sown fields,
From which an ancient curse had banish'd them.
Their rapid feet the fugitive pursue;
They only pause to start a wilder fear.
IPHIGENIA.
Unhappy one; thy lot resembles his,
Thou feel'st what he, poor fugitive, must suffer.
ORESTES.
What say'st thou? why presume my fate like his?
IPHIGENIA.
A brother's murder weighs upon thy soul;
Thy younger brother told the mournful tale.
ORESTES.
I cannot suffer that thy noble soul
Should be deceiv'd by error. Rich in guile,
And practis'd in deceit, a stranger may
A web of falsehood cunningly devise
To snare a stranger;—between us be truth.
I am Orestes! and this guilty head
Is stooping to the tomb, and covets death;
It will be welcome now in any shape.
Whoe'er thou art, for thee and for my friend
I wish deliverance;—I desire it not.
Thou seem'st to linger here against thy will;
Contrive some means of flight, and leave me here:
My lifeless corpse hurl'd headlong from the rock,
My blood shall mingle with the dashing waves,
And bring a curse upon this barbarous shore!
Return together home to lovely Greece,
With joy a new existence to commence.
[ORESTES retires.
IPHIGENIA.
At length Fulfilment, fairest child of Jove,
Thou dost descend upon me from on high!
How vast thine image! scarce my straining eye
Can reach thy hands, which, fill'd with golden fruit
And wreaths of blessing, from Olympus' height
Shower treasures down. As by his bounteous gifts
We recognize the monarch (for what seems
To thousands opulence is nought to him),
So you, ye heavenly Powers, are also known
By bounty long withheld, and wisely plann'd.
Ye only know what things are good for us;
Ye view the future's wide-extended realm;
While from our eye a dim or starry veil
The prospect shrouds. Calmly ye hear our prayers,
When we like children sue for greater speed.
Not immature ye pluck heaven's golden fruit;
And woe to him, who with impatient hand,
His date of joy forestalling, gathers death.
Let not this long-awaited happiness,
Which yet my heart hath scarcely realiz'd,
Like to the shadow of departed friends,
Glide vainly by with triple sorrow fraught!
ORESTES, returning.
Dost thou for Pylades and for thyself
Implore the gods, blend not my name with yours;
Thou wilt not save the wretch whom thou wouldst join,
But wilt participate his curse and woe.
IPHIGENIA.
My destiny is firmly bound to thine.
ORESTES.
No, say not so; alone and unattended
Let me descend to Hades. Though thou shouldst
In thine own veil enwrap the guilty one.
Thou couldst not shroud him from his wakeful foes;
And e'en thy sacred presence, heavenly maid,
Drives them aside, but scares them not away.
With brazen impious feet they dare not tread
Within the precincts of this sacred grove:
Yet in the distance, ever and anon,
I hear their horrid laughter, like the howl
Of famish'd wolves, beneath the tree wherein
The traveller hides. Without, encamp'd they lie,
And should I quit this consecrated grove,
Shaking their serpent locks, they would arise,
And, raising clouds of dust on every side,
Ceaseless pursue their miserable prey.
IPHIGENIA.
Orestes, canst thou hear a friendly word?
ORESTES.
Reserve it for one favour'd by the gods.
IPHIGENIA.
To thee they give anew the light of hope.
ORESTES.
Through clouds and smoke I see the feeble gleam
Of the death-stream which lights me down to hell.
IPHIGENIA.
Hast thou one sister only, thy Electra?
ORESTES.
I knew but one: yet her kind destiny,
Which seem'd to us so terrible, betimes
Removed an elder sister from the woe
That dogs the race of Pelops. Cease, oh cease
Thy questions, maiden, nor thus league thyself
With the Eumenides, who blow away,
With fiendish joy, the ashes from my soul,
Lest the last spark of horror's fiery brand
Should be extinguish'd there. Must then the fire,
Deliberately kindl'd and supplied
With hellish sulphur, never cease to sear
My tortur'd bosom?
IPHIGENIA.
In the flame I throw
Sweet incense. Let the gentle breath of love,
Low murmuring, cool thy bosom's fiery glow.
Orestes, fondly lov'd,—canst thou not hear me?
Hath the terrific Furies' grisly band
Completely dried the life-blood in thy veins?
Creeps there, as from the Gorgon's direful head,
A petrifying charm through all thy limbs?
If hollow voices, from a mother's blood,
Call thee to hell, may not a sister's word
With benediction pure ascend to heaven,
And summon thence some gracious power to aid thee?
ORESTES.
She calls! she calls!—Thou too desir'st my death?
Is there a fury shrouded in thy form?
Who art thou, that thy voice thus horribly
Can harrow up my bosom's inmost depths?
IPHIGENIA.
Thine inmost heart reveals it. I am she,
Iphigenia,—look on me, Orestes!
ORESTES.
Thou!
IPHIGENIA.
My own brother!
ORESTES.
Hence, away, begone!
Touch not these locks, I counsel thee; from me,
As from Creusa's bridal robe, proceeds
An unextinguishable fire. Depart!
Like Hercules, an ignominious death,
Unworthy wretch, look'd in myself, I'll die.
IPHIGENIA.
Thou shalt not perish! Would that I might hear
One quiet word from thee! dispel my doubts,
Make sure the bliss I have implor'd so long.
A wheel of joy and sorrow in my heart
Ceaseless revolves. With shy reserve I turn
From one unknown; but unto thee, my brother,
My inmost heart resistlessly impels me.
ORESTES.
Is this Lyæus' temple? Doth the glow
Of holy rage unbridl'd thus possess
The sacred priestess?
IPHIGENIA.
Hear me, oh, look up!
See how my heart, which hath been clos'd so long,
Doth open to the bliss of seeing thee,
The dearest treasure that the world contains,—
Of falling on thy neck, and folding thee
Within my longing arms, which have till now
Met the embraces of the empty wind.
Do not repulse me,—the eternal spring,
Whose crystal waters from Parnassus flow,
Bounds not more gaily on from rock to rock,
Down to the golden vale, than from my heart
The waters of affection freely gush,
And round me form a circling sea of bliss.
Orestes! Oh, my brother!
ORESTES.
Lovely nymph!
Nor thy caresses, nor thyself I trust;
Diana claims attendants more severe,
And doth avenge her desecrated fane.
Remove thy circling arm! and if thou wilt
Safety and love upon a youth bestow,
Unto my friend, more worthy than myself,
Impart thy gifts; among yon rocks he roves;
Go seek him, guide him hence, and heed not me.
IPHIGENIA.
Brother, command thyself, and better know
Thy new-found sister, nor misconstrue thus
Her pure and heav'nly joy. Ye Gods, remove
From his fix'd eye delusion, lest this hour
Of highest bliss should make us trebly wretched!
Oh she is here, thine own, thy long-lost sister,
Whom great Diana from the altar snatch'd,
And safely plac'd here in her sacred fane.
A captive thou, prepar'd for sacrifice,
And findest here a sister in the priestess.
ORESTES.
Accursed race! Now may the sun behold
Your final doom. Is not Electra here?
That she with us may perish, nor her life
For heavier doom and deeper woe reserve.
'Tis well,—I follow, priestess! Fratricide
Is an old custom of our ancient house;
And you, ye Gods, I thank, that ye resolve
Childless to root me hence. Thee let me counsel
To view too fondly neither sun nor stars.
Come follow to the gloomy realms below!
As dragons, gender'd in the sulphur pool,
Swallow each other with voracious rage,
So our accurs'd race destroys itself.
Childless and guiltless come below with me!
There's pity in thy look! oh, gaze not so,—
'Twas with such looks that Clytemnestra sought
An entrance to her son Orestes' heart,
And yet his uprais'd arm her bosom pierc'd.
His mother fell!—Appear, indignant shade!
Within the circle step, ye fiends of hell,
Be present at the welcome spectacle,
The last, most horrible, that ye prepare!
Nor hate, nor vengeance, whets the poignard now,
A sister is constrain'd to deal the blow.
Weep not! Thy guiltless soul is free from crime.
From earliest infancy I nought have lov'd,
As thee I could have lov'd, my sister. Come,
The weapon raise, spare not, this bosom rend,
And make an outlet for its boiling streams!
(He sinks exhausted.)
IPHIGENIA.
Alone I cannot bear this bliss and woe.
Where art thou, Pylades? Thine aid I need.
(Iphigenia retires.)
SCENE II.
ORESTES.
Recovering from his swoon and standing up.
Give yet another! reach from Lethe's stream
The last reviving draught of cool refreshment!
Soon shall its waters in my bosom still
Life's fitful fever; and my spirit then
Adown oblivion's stream shall glide to you,
Ye spirits, shrouded in eternal mist.
With tranquil pleasure in your deep repose
A weary son of earth may lave his soul!—
What whisp'ring sounds pervade the dreary grove?
What hollow murmurs haunt its twilight gloom?—
They gather round to view the stranger guest!
Who are yon troop in high communion met,
Like an assembl'd family of princes?
They mingle peacefully, of every age,
And either sex, yet are their godlike forms
Cast in a kindred mould. 'Tis they, 'tis they,
The fathers of my race! With Atreus,
In friendly converse glides Thyestes' shade,
And children playfully around them sport.
Is there no enmity among you now?
And is revenge extinguish'd with the sun?
I then am welcome, and may hope to join
Your solemn company. My fathers, hail!
Orestes, last descendant of your race,
Salutes you. What ye sow'd, that hath he reap'd
Laden with curses he descends to you.
But burdens here are lighter far to bear.
Receive him, oh, receive him in your circle!
Thee, Atreus, I revere, and thee, Thyestes:
Here all are free from enmity and hate.—
Show me my father, whom I only once
In life beheld.—Art thou my father, thou,
My mother leading thus familiarly?
Dares Clytemnestra reach her hand to thee;
Then may Orestes also draw near her,
And say, behold thy son!—My ancestors,
Behold your son, and bid him welcome here,
Among the sons of ancient Tantalus,
A kind salute on earth was murder's watchword,
And all their joys commence beyond the grave.
Ye welcome me! Ye bid me join your circle!
Oh, lead me to my honour'd ancestor!
Where is the aged hero? that I may
Behold the dear, the venerable head,
Of him, who with the gods in council sat.
You seem to shudder and to turn away?
What may this mean? Suffers the godlike man?
Alas! the mighty gods, with ruthless hate,
To his heroic breast, with brazen chains,
Have cruel pangs indissolubly bound.
SCENE III.
ORESTES. IPHIGENIA. PYLADES.
ORESTES.
How! are ye come already? Sister, welcome.
Electra still is missing: some kind god
With gentle arrow send her quickly hither.
Thee, my poor friend, I must compassionate!
Come with me, come to Pluto's gloomy throne.
There to salute our hosts like stranger guests.
IPHIGENIA.
Celestial pair, who from the realms above
By night and day shed down the beauteous light
To cheer mankind, but who may not illume
Departed spirits, save a mortal pair!
A brother's and a sister's anguish pity!
For thou, Diana, lov'st thy gentle brother
Beyond what earth and heaven can offer thee
And dost, with quiet yearning, ever turn
Thy virgin face to his eternal light.
Let not my only brother, found so late,
Rave in the darkness of insanity!
And is thy will, when thou didst here conceal me,
At length fulfill'd,—would'st thou to me through him,
To him through me, thy gracious aid extend,—
Oh, free him from the fetters of this curse,
Lest vainly pass the precious hours of safety.
PYLADES.
Dost thou not know us, and this sacred grove,
And this blest light, which shines not on the dead?
Dost thou not feel thy sister and thy friend,
Who hold thee living in their firm embrace?
Grasp us! we are not shadows. Mark my words!
Collect thyself,—each moment now is precious,
And our return hangs on a slender thread,
Which, as it seems, some gracious fate doth spin.
ORESTES to IPHIGENIA.
My sister, let me for the first time taste,
With open heart, pure joy within thine arms!
Ye gods, who charge the heavy clouds with dread,
And sternly gracious send the long-sought rain
With thunder and the rush of mighty winds,
A horrid deluge on the trembling earth;
Yet dissipate at length man's dread suspense,
Exchanging timid wonder's anxious gaze
For grateful looks and joyous songs of praise,
When in each sparkling drop which gems the leaves,
Apollo, thousand-fold, reflects his beam,
And Iris colours with a magic hand
The dusky texture of the parting clouds;
Oh, let me also in my sister's arms,
And on the bosom of my friend, enjoy
With grateful thanks the bliss ye now bestow
My heart assures me that your curses cease.
The dread Eumenides at length retire,
The brazen gates of Tartarus I hear
Behind them closing with a thund'ring clang.
A quick'ning odour from the earth ascends,
Inviting me to chase, upon its plains,
The joys of life and deeds of high emprise.
PYLADES.
Lose not the moments which are limited!
The favouring gale, which swells our parting sail,
Must to Olympus waft our perfect joy.
Quick counsel and resolve the time demands.
ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE I.
IPHIGENIA.
When the Powers on high decree
For a feeble child of earth
Dire perplexity and woe,
And his spirit doom to pass
With tumult wild from joy to grief,
And back again from grief to joy,
In fearful alternation;
They in mercy then provide,
In the precincts of his home,
Or upon the distant shore,
That to him may never fail
Ready help in hours of need,
A tranquil, faithful friend.
Oh, bless, ye heavenly powers, our Pylades,
And every project that his mind may form!
In combat his the vigorous arm of youth,
And in the counsel his the eye of age.
His soul is tranquil; in his inner mind
He guards a sacred, undisturb'd repose,
And from its silent depths a rich supply
Of aid and counsel draws for the distress'd.
He tore me from my brother, upon whom,
With fond amaze, I gaz'd and gaz'd again;
I could not realize my happiness,
Nor loose him from my arms, and heeded not
The danger's near approach that threatens us.
To execute their project of escape,
They hasten to the sea, where in a bay
Their comrades in the vessel lie conceal'd
And wait a signal. Me they have supplied
With artful answers, should the monarch send
To urge the sacrifice. Alas! I see
I must consent to follow like a child.
I have not learn'd deception, nor the art
To gain with crafty wiles my purposes.
Detested falsehood! it doth not relieve
The breast like words of truth: it comforts not,
But is a torment in the forger's heart,
And, like an arrow which a god directs,
Flies back and wounds the archer. Through my heart
One fear doth chase another; perhaps with rage,
Again on the unconsecrated shore,
The Furies' grisly band my brother seize.
Perchance they are surpris'd? Methinks I hear
The tread of armed men. A messenger
Is coming from the king, with hasty steps.
How throbs my heart, how troubl'd is my soul
Now that I see the countenance of one,
Whom with a word untrue I must encounter!
SCENE II.
IPHIGENIA. ARKAS.
ARKAS.
Priestess, with speed conclude the sacrifice,
Impatiently the king and people wait.
IPHIGENIA.
I had perform'd my duty and thy will,
Had not an unforeseen impediment
The execution of my purpose thwarted.
ARKAS.
What is it that obstructs the king's commands?
IPHIGENIA.
Chance, which from mortals will not brook control.
ARKAS.
Possess me with the reason, that with speed
I may inform the king, who hath decreed
The death of both.
IPHIGENIA.
The gods have not decreed it.
The elder of these men doth bear the guilt
Of kindred murder; on his steps attend
The dread Eumenides. They seiz'd their prey
Within the inner fane, polluting thus
The holy sanctuary. I hasten now,
Together with my virgin-train, to bathe
Diana's image in the sea, and there
With solemn rites its purity restore.
Let none presume our silent march to follow!
ARKAS.
This hindrance to the monarch I'll announce:
Do not commence the rite till he permit.
IPHIGENIA.
The priestess interferes alone in this.
ARKAS.
An incident so strange the king should know.
IPHIGENIA.
Here, nor his counsel nor command avails.
ARKAS.
Oft are the great consulted out of form.
IPHIGENIA.
Do not insist on what I must refuse.
ARKAS.
A needful and a just demand refuse not.
IPHIGENIA.
I yield, if thou delay not.
ARKAS.
I with speed
Will bear these tidings to the camp, and soon
Acquaint thee, priestess, with the king's reply.
There is a message I would gladly bear him:
'Twould quickly banish all perplexity:
Thou didst not heed thy faithful friend's advice.
IPHIGENIA.
I willingly have done whate'er I could.
ARKAS.
E'en now 'tis not too late to change thy mind.
IPHIGENIA.
To do so is, alas, beyond our power.
ARKAS.
What thou wouldst shun, thou deem'st impossible.
IPHIGENIA.
Thy wish doth make thee deem it possible.
ARKAS.
Wilt thou so calmly venture everything?
IPHIGENIA.
My fate I have committed to the gods.
ARKAS.
The gods are wont to save by human means.
IPHIGENIA.
By their appointment everything is done.
ARKAS.
Believe me, all doth now depend on thee.
The irritated temper of the king
Alone condemns these men to bitter death.
The soldiers from the cruel sacrifice
And bloody service long have been disused;
Nay, many, whom their adverse fortunes cast
In foreign regions, there themselves have felt
How godlike to the exil'd wanderer
The friendly countenance of man appears.
Do not deprive us of thy gentle aid!
With ease thou canst thy sacred task fulfil:
For nowhere doth benignity, which comes
In human form from heaven, so quickly gain
An empire o'er the heart, as where a race,
Gloomy and savage, full of life and power,
Without external guidance, and oppress'd
With vague forebodings, bear life's heavy load.
IPHIGENIA.
Shake not my spirit, which thou canst not bend
According to thy will.
ARKAS.
While there is time
Nor labour nor persuasion shall be spar'd.
IPHIGENIA.
Thy labour but occasions pain to me;
Both are in vain; therefore, I pray, depart.
ARKAS.
I summon pain to aid me. 'tis a friend
Who counsels wisely.
IPHIGENIA.
Though it shakes my soul,
It doth not banish thence my strong repugnance.
ARKAS.
Can then a gentle soul repugnance feel
For benefits bestow'd by one so noble?
IPHIGENIA.
Yes, when the donor, for those benefits,
Instead of gratitude, demands myself.
ARKAS.
Who no affection feels doth never want
Excuses. To the king I'll now relate
All that has happen'd. Oh, that in thy soul
Thou wouldst revolve his noble conduct, priestess,
Since thy arrival to the present day!
SCENE III.
IPHIGENIA, alone.
These words at an unseasonable hour
Produce a strong revulsion in my breast;
I am alarm'd!—For as the rushing tide
In rapid currents eddies o'er the rocks
Which lie among the sand upon the shore;
E'en so a stream of joy o'erwhelm'd my soul.
I grasp'd what had appear'd impossible.
It was as though another gentle cloud
Around me lay, to raise me from the earth,
And rock my spirit in the same sweet sleep
Which the kind goddess shed around my brow,
What time her circling arm from danger snatch'd me.
My brother forcibly engross'd my heart;
I listen'd only to his friend's advice;
My soul rush'd eagerly to rescue them,
And as the mariner with joy surveys
The less'ning breakers of a desert isle,
So Tauris lay behind me. But the voice
Of faithful Arkas wakes me from my dream,
Reminding me that those whom I forsake
Are also men. Deceit doth now become
Doubly detested. O my soul, be still!
Beginn'st thou now to tremble and to doubt?
Thy lonely shelter on the firm-set earth
Must thou abandon? and, embark'd once more,
At random drift upon tumultuous waves,
A stranger to thyself and to the world?
SCENE IV.
IPHIGENIA. PYLADES.
PYLADES.
Where is she? that my words with speed may tell
The joyful tidings of our near escape!
IPHIGENIA.
Oppress'd with gloomy care, I much require
The certain comfort thou dost promise me.
PYLADES.
Thy brother is restor'd! The rocky paths
Of this unconsecrated shore we trod
In friendly converse, while behind us lay,
Unmark'd by us, the consecrated grove;
And ever with increasing glory shone
The fire of youth around his noble brow.
Courage and hope his glowing eye inspir'd;
And his free heart exulted with the joy
Of saving thee, his sister, and his friend.
IPHIGENIA.
The gods shower blessings on thee, Pylades!
And from those lips which breathe such welcome news,
Be the sad note of anguish never heard!
PYLADES.
I bring yet more,—for Fortune, like a prince,
Comes not alone, but well accompanied.
Our friends and comrades we have also found.
Within a bay they had conceal'd the ship,
And mournful sat expectant. They beheld
Thy brother, and a joyous shout uprais'd,
Imploring him to haste the parting hour.
Each hand impatient long'd to grasp the oar,
While from the shore a gently murmuring breeze,
Perceiv'd by all, unfurl'd its wing auspicious.
Let us then hasten; guide me to the fane,
That I may tread the sanctuary, and seize
With sacred awe the object of our hopes.
I can unaided on my shoulder bear
Diana's image: how I long to feel
The precious burden!
[While speaking the last words, he approaches
the Temple, without perceiving that he is not
followed by Iphigenia: at length he turns round.]
Why thus ling'ring stand.
Why art thou silent? wherefore thus confus'd?
Doth some new obstacle oppose our bliss?
Inform me, hast thou to the king announc'd
The prudent message we agreed upon?
IPHIGENIA.
I have, dear Pylades; yet wilt thou chide.
Thy very aspect is a mute reproach.
The royal messenger arriv'd, and I,
According to thy counsel, fram'd my speech.
He seem'd surpris'd, and urgently besought,
That to the monarch I should first announce
The rite unusual, and attend his will.
I now await the messenger's return.
PYLADES.
Danger again doth hover o'er our heads!
O priestess, why neglect to shroud thyself
Within the veil of sacerdotal rites?
IPHIGENIA.
I never have employ'd them as a veil.
PYLADES.
Pure soul! thy scruples will destroy alike
Thyself and us. Why did I not foresee
Such an emergency, and tutor thee
This counsel also wisely to elude?
IPHIGENIA.
Chide only me, for mine alone the blame.
Yet other answer could I not return
To him, who strongly and with reason urg'd
What my own heart acknowledg'd to be right.
PYLADES.
The danger thickens; but let us be firm,
Nor with incautious haste betray ourselves;
Calmly await the messenger's return,
And then stand fast, whatever his reply:
For the appointment of such sacred rites
Doth to the priestess, not the king belong.
Should he demand the stranger to behold
Who is by madness heavily oppress'd,
Evasively pretend, that in the fane,
Securely guarded, thou retain'st us both.
Thus you secure us time to fly with speed,
Bearing the sacred treasure from this race,
Unworthy its possession. Phœbus sends
Auspicious omens, and fulfils his word,
Ere we the first conditions have perform'd.
Free is Orestes, from the curse absolv'd!
Oh, with the freed one, to the rocky isle
Where dwells the god, waft us, propitious gales!
Thence to Mycene, that she may revive;
That from the ashes of the extinguish'd hearth,
The household gods may joyously arise,
And beauteous fire illumine their abode!
Thy hand from golden censers first shall strew
The fragrant incense. O'er that threshold thou
Shalt life and blessing once again dispense,
The curse atone, and all thy kindred grace
With the fresh bloom of renovated life.
IPHIGENIA.
As doth the flower revolve to meet the sun,
Once more my spirit to sweet comfort turns,
Struck by thy words' invigorating ray.
How dear the counsel of a present friend,
Lacking whose godlike power, the lonely one
In silence droops! for, lock'd within his breast,
Slowly are ripen'd purpose and resolve,
Which friendship's genial warmth had soon matur'd.
PYLADES.
Farewell! I haste to re-assure our friends,
Who anxiously await us: then with speed
I will return, and, hid within the brake,
Attend thy signal.—Wherefore, all at once,
Doth anxious thought o'ercloud thy brow serene?
IPHIGENIA.
Forgive me! As light clouds athwart the sun,
So cares and fears float darkling o'er my soul.
PYLADES.
Oh, banish fear! With danger it hath form'd
A close alliance,—they are constant friends.
IPHIGENIA.
It is an honest scruple, which forbids
That I should cunningly deceive the king,
And plunder him who was my second sire.
PYLADES.
Him thou dost fly, who would have slain thy brother.
IPHIGENIA.
To me, at least, he hath been ever kind.
PYLADES.
What Fate commands is not ingratitude.
IPHIGENIA.
Alas! it still remains ingratitude;
Necessity alone can justify it.
PYLADES.
Thee, before gods and men it justifies.
IPHIGENIA.
But my own heart is still unsatisfied.
PYLADES.
Scruples too rigid are a cloak for pride.
IPHIGENIA.
I cannot argue, I can only feel.
PYLADES.
Conscious of right, thou shouldst respect thyself.
IPHIGENIA.
Then only doth the heart know perfect ease,
When not a stain pollutes it.
PYLADES.
In this fane
Pure hast thou kept thy heart. Life teaches us
To be less strict with others and ourselves;
Thou'lt learn the lesson too. So wonderful
Is human nature, and its varied ties
Are so involv'd and complicate, that none
May hope to keep his inmost spirit pure,
And walk without perplexity through life.
Nor are we call'd upon to judge ourselves;
With circumspection to pursue his path,
Is the immediate duty of a man.
For seldom can he rightly estimate,
Or his past conduct or his present deeds.
IPHIGENIA.
Almost thou dost persuade me to consent.
PYLADES.
Needs there persuasion when no choice is granted?
To save thyself, thy brother, and a friend,
One path presents itself, and canst thou ask
If we shall follow it?
IPHIGENIA.
Still let me pause,
For such injustice thou couldst not thyself
Calmly return for benefits receiv'd.
PYLADES.
If we should perish, bitter self-reproach,
Forerunner of despair, will be thy portion.
It seems thou art not used to suffer much,
When, to escape so great calamity,
Thou canst refuse to utter one false word.
IPHIGENIA.
Oh, that I bore within a manly heart!
Which, when it hath conceiv'd a bold resolve,
'Gainst every other voice doth close itself.
PYLADES.
In vain thou dost refuse; with iron hand
Necessity commands; her stern decree
Is law supreme, to which the gods themselves
Must yield submission. In dread silence rules
The uncounsell'd sister of eternal fate.
What she appoints thee to endure,—endure;
What to perform,—perform. The rest thou know'st.
Ere long I will return, and then receive
The seal of safety from thy sacred hand.
SCENE V.
IPHIGENIA, alone.
I must obey him, for I see my friends
Beset with peril. Yet my own sad fate
Doth with increasing anguish move my heart.
May I no longer feed the silent hope
Which in my solitude I fondly cherish'd?
Shall the dire curse eternally endure?
And shall our fated race ne'er rise again
With blessings crown'd?—All mortal things decay!
The noblest powers, the purest joys of life
At length subside: then wherefore not the curse?
And have I vainly hop'd that, guarded here,
Secluded from the fortunes of my race,
I, with pure heart and hands, some future day
Might cleanse the deep defilement of our house?
Scarce was my brother in my circling arms
From raging madness suddenly restor'd,
Scarce had the ship, long pray'd for, near'd the strand,
Once more to waft me to my native shores,
When unrelenting fate, with iron hand,
A double crime enjoins; commanding me
To steal the image, sacred and rever'd,
Confided to my care, and him deceive
To whom I owe my life and destiny.
Let not abhorrence spring within my heart!
Nor the old Titan's hate, toward you, ye gods,
Infix its vulture talons in my breast!
Save me, and save your image in my soul!
An ancient song comes back upon mine ear—
I had forgotten it, and willingly—
The Parcæ's song, which horribly they sang,
What time, hurl'd headlong from his golden seat,
Fell Tantalus. They with their noble friend
Keen anguish suffer'd; savage was their breast
And horrible their song. In days gone by,
When we were children, oft our ancient nurse
Would sing it to us, and I mark'd it well.
Oh, fear the immortals,
Ye children of men!
Eternal dominion
They hold in their hands.
And o'er their wide empire
Wield absolute sway.
Whom they have exalted
Let him fear them most!
Around golden tables,
On cliffs and clouds resting
The seats are prepar'd.
If contest ariseth;
The guests are hurl'd headlong,
Disgrac'd and dishonour'd,
And fetter'd in darkness,
Await with vain longing,
A juster decree.
But in feasts everlasting,
Around the gold tables
Still dwell the immortals.
From mountain to mountain
They stride; while ascending
From fathomless chasms,
The breath of the Titans,
Half stifl'd with anguish,
Like volumes of incense
Fumes up to the skies.
From races ill-fated,
Their aspect joy-bringing,
Oft turn the celestials,
And shun in the children
To gaze on the features
Once lov'd and still speaking
Of their mighty sire.
Thus sternly the Fates sang
Immur'd in his dungeon.
The banish'd one listens,
The song of the Parcæ,
His children's doom ponders,
And boweth his head.
ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE I.
THOAS. ARKAS.
ARKAS.
I own I am perplex'd, and scarcely know
'Gainst whom to point the shaft of my suspicion,
Whether the priestess aids the captives' flight,
Or they themselves clandestinely contrive it.
'Tis rumour'd that the ship which brought them here
Is lurking somewhere in a bay conceal'd.
This stranger's madness, these new lustral rites,
The specious pretext for delay, excite
Mistrust, and call aloud for vigilance.
THOAS.
Summon the priestess to attend me here!
Then go with speed, and strictly search the shore,
From yon projecting land to Dian's grove:
Forbear to violate its sacred depths;
A watchful ambush set, attack and seize,
According to your wont, whome'er ye find.
[Arkas retires.
SCENE II.
THOAS, alone.
Fierce anger rages in my riven breast,
First against her, whom I esteem'd so pure;
Then 'gainst myself, whose foolish lenity
Hath fashion'd her for treason. Man is soon
Inur'd to slavery, and quickly learns
Submission, when of freedom quite depriv'd.
If she had fallen in the savage hands
Of my rude sires, and had their holy rage
Forborne to slay her, grateful for her life,
She would have recogniz'd her destiny.
Have shed before the shrine the stranger's blood,
And duty nam'd what was necessity.
Now my forbearance in her breast allures
Audacious wishes. Vainly I had hop'd
To bind her to me; rather she contrives
To shape an independent destiny.
She won my heart through flattery; and now
That I oppose her, seeks to gain her ends
By fraud and cunning, and my kindness deems
A worthless and prescriptive property.
SCENE III.
IPHIGENIA. THOAS.
IPHIGENIA.
Me hast thou summon'd? wherefore art thou here?
THOAS.
Wherefore delay the sacrifice? inform me.
IPHIGENIA.
I have acquainted Arkas with the reasons.
THOAS.
From thee I wish to hear them more at large.
IPHIGENIA.
The goddess for reflection grants thee time.
THOAS.
To thee this time seems also opportune.
IPHIGENIA.
If to this cruel deed thy heart is steel'd,
Thou shouldst not come! A king who meditates
A deed inhuman, may find slaves enow,
Willing for hire to bear one half the curse,
And leave the monarch's presence undefil'd.
Enwrapt in gloomy clouds he forges death,
Whose flaming arrow on his victim's head
His hirelings hurl; while he above the storm
Remains untroubl'd, an impassive god.
THOAS.
A wild song, priestess, issued from thy lips.
IPHIGENIA.
No priestess, king! but Agamemnon's daughter;
While yet unknown, thou didst respect my words:
A princess now,—and think'st thou to command me
From youth I have been tutor'd to obey,
My parents first, and then the deity;
And thus obeying, ever hath my soul
Known sweetest freedom. But nor then nor now
Have I been taught compliance with the voice
And savage mandates of a man.
THOAS.
Not I,
An ancient law doth claim obedience from thee.
IPHIGENIA.
Our passions eagerly catch hold of laws
Which they can wield as weapons. But to me
Another law, one far more ancient, speaks,
And doth command me to withstand thee, king!
That law declaring sacred every stranger.
THOAS.
These men, methinks, lie very near thy heart.
When sympathy with them can lead thee thus
To violate discretion's primal law,
That those in power should never be provok'd.
IPHIGENIA.
Speaking or silent, thou canst always know
What is, and ever must be, in my heart.
Doth not remembrance of a common doom,
To soft compassion melt the hardest heart?
How much more mine! in them I see myself.
I trembling kneel'd before the altar once.
And solemnly the shade of early death
Environ'd me. Aloft the knife was rais'd
To pierce my bosom, throbbing with warm life;
A dizzy horror overwhelm'd my soul;
My eyes grew dim;—I found myself in safety.
Are we not bound to render the distress'd
The gracious kindness from the gods receiv'd?
Thou know'st we are, and yet wilt thou compel me?
THOAS.
Obey thine office, priestess, not the king.
IPHIGENIA.
Cease! nor thus seek to cloak the savage force
Which triumphs o'er a woman's feebleness.
Though woman, I am born as free as man.
Did Agamemnon's son before thee stand,
And thou requiredst what became him not,
His arm and trusty weapon would defend
His bosom's freedom. I have only words
But it becomes a noble-minded man
To treat with due respect the words of woman.
THOAS.
I more respect them than a brother's sword.
IPHIGENIA.
Uncertain ever is the chance of arms,
No prudent warrior doth despise his foe;
Nor yet defenceless 'gainst severity
Hath nature left the weak; she gives him craft
And wily cunning: artful he delays,
Evades, eludes, and finally escapes.
Such arms are justified by violence.
THOAS.
But circumspection countervails deceit.
IPHIGENIA.
Which a pure spirit doth abhor to use.
THOAS.
Do not incautiously condemn thyself.
IPHIGENIA.
Oh, couldst thou see the struggle of my soul,
Courageously to ward the first attack
Of an unhappy doom, which threatens me!
Do I then stand before thee weaponless?
Prayer, lovely prayer, fair branch in woman's hand,
More potent far than instruments of war,
Thou dost thrust back. What now remains for me
Wherewith my inborn freedom to defend?
Must I implore a miracle from heaven?
Is there no power within my spirit's depths?
THOAS.
Extravagant thy interest in the fate
Of these two strangers. Tell me who they are,
For whom thy heart is thus so deeply mov'd.
IPHIGENIA.
They are—they seem at least—I think them Greeks.
THOAS.
Thy countrymen; no doubt they have renew'd
The pleasing picture of return.
IPHIGENIA, after a pause.
Doth man
Lay undisputed claim to noble deeds?
Doth he alone to his heroic breast
Clasp the impossible? What call we great?
What deeds, though oft narrated, still uplift
With shudd'ring horror the narrator's soul,
But those which, with improbable success,
The valiant have attempted? Shall the man
Who all alone steals on his foes by night,
And raging like an unexpected fire,
Destroys the slumbering host, and press'd at length
By rous'd opponents or his foemen's steeds,
Retreats with booty—be alone extoll'd?
Or he who, scorning safety, boldly roams
Through woods and dreary wilds, to scour the land
Of thieves and robbers? Is nought left for us?
Must gentle woman quite forego her nature,—
Force against force employ,—like Amazons,
Usurp the sword from man, and bloodily
Revenge oppression? In my heart I feel
The stirrings of a noble enterprize;
But if I fail—severe reproach, alas!
And bitter misery will be my doom.
Thus on my knees I supplicate the gods.
Oh, are ye truthful, as men say ye are,
Now prove it by your countenance and aid;
Honour the truth in me! Attend, O king!
A secret plot is laid; 'tis vain to ask
Touching the captives; they are gone, and seek
Their comrades who await them on the shore.
The eldest,—he whom madness lately seiz'd,
And who is now recover'd,—is Orestes,
My brother, and the other Pylades,
His early friend and faithful confidant.
From Delphi, Phœbus sent them to this shore
With a divine command to steal away
The image of Diana, and to him
Bear back the sister, promising for this
Redemption to the blood-stain'd matricide.
I have deliver'd now into thy hands
The remnants of the house of Tantalus.
Destroy us—if thou canst.
THOAS.
And dost thou think
The savage Scythian will attend the voice
Of truth and of humanity, unheard
By the Greek Atreus?
IPHIGENIA.
'Tis heard by all,
Whate'er may be their clime, within whose breast
Flows pure and free the gushing stream of life.—
What silent purpose broods within thy soul?
Is it destruction? Let me perish first!
For now, deliv'rance hopeless, I perceive
The dreadful peril into which I have
With rash precipitancy plung'd my friends.
Alas! I soon shall see them bound before me!
How to my brother shall I say farewell?
I, the unhappy author of his death.
Ne'er can I gaze again in his dear eyes!
THOAS.
The traitors have contriv'd a cunning web,
And cast it round thee, who, secluded long,
Giv'st willing credence to thine own desires.
IPHIGENIA.
No, no! I'd pledge my life these men are true.
And shouldst thou find them otherwise, O king,
Then let them perish both, and cast me forth,
That on some rock-girt island's dreary shore
I may atone my folly. Are they true,
And is this man indeed my dear Orestes,
My brother, long implor'd,—release us both,
And o'er us stretch the kind protecting arm,
Which long hath shelter'd me. My noble sire
Fell through his consort's guilt,—she by her son;
On him alone the hope of Atreus' race
Doth now repose. Oh, with pure heart and hands
Let me depart to expiate our house.
Yes, thou wilt keep thy promise; thou didst swear,
That were a safe return provided me,
I should be free to go. The hour is come.
A king doth never grant like common men,
Merely to gain a respite from petition;
Nor promise what he hopes will ne'er be claim'd.
Then first he feels his dignity complete
When he can make the long-expecting happy.
THOAS.
As fire opposes water, and doth seek
With hissing rage to overcome its foe,
So doth my anger strive against thy words.
IPHIGENIA.
Let mercy, like the consecrated flame
Of silent sacrifice, encircl'd round
With songs of gratitude, and joy, and praise,
Above the tumult gently rise to heaven.
THOAS.
How often hath this voice assuag'd my soul!
IPHIGENIA.
Extend thy hand to me in sign of peace.
THOAS.
Large thy demand within so short a time.
IPHIGENIA.
Beneficence doth no reflection need.
THOAS.
'Tis needed oft, for evil springs from good.
IPHIGENIA.
'Tis doubt which good doth oft to evil turn.
Consider not: act as thy feelings prompt thee.
SCENE IV.
ORESTES (armed). IPHIGENIA. THOAS.
ORESTES, addressing his followers.
Redouble your exertions! hold them back!
Few moments will suffice; retain your ground,
And keep a passage open to the ship
For me and for my sister.
To IPHIGENIA, without perceiving THOAS.
Come with speed!
We are betray'd,—brief time remains for flight.
THOAS.
None in my presence with impunity
His naked weapon wears.
IPHIGENIA.
Do not profane
Diana's sanctuary with rage and blood.
Command your people to forbear awhile,
And listen to the priestess, to the sister.
ORESTES.
Say, who is he that threatens us?
IPHIGENIA.
In him
Revere the king, who was my second father.
Forgive me, brother, that my childlike heart
Hath plac'd our fate thus wholly in his hands.
I have betray'd your meditated flight,
And thus from treachery redeem'd my soul.
ORESTES.
Will he permit our peaceable return?
IPHIGENIA.
Thy gleaming sword forbids me to reply.
ORESTES, sheathing his sword.
Then speak! thou seest I listen to thy words.
SCENE V.
ORESTES. IPHIGENIA. THOAS.
Enter PYLADES, soon after him ARKAS, both with drawn swords.
PYLADES.
Do not delay! our friends are putting forth
Their final strength, and yielding step by step,
Are slowly driven backward to the sea.—
A conference of princes find I here?
Is this the sacred person of the king?
ARKAS.
Calmly, as doth become thee, thou dost stand,
O king, surrounded by thine enemies.
Soon their temerity shall be chastis'd;
Their yielding followers fly.—their ship is ours.
Speak but the word, and it is wrapt in flames.
THOAS.
Go, and command my people to forbear!
Let none annoy the foe while we confer. (Arkas retires.)
ORESTES.
I willingly consent. Go, Pylades!
Collect the remnant of our friends, and wait
The appointed issue of our enterprize.
(Pylades retires.)
SCENE VI.
IPHIGENIA. THOAS. ORESTES.
IPHIGENIA.
Believe my cares ere ye begin to speak.
I fear contention, if thou wilt not hear
The voice of equity, O king,—if thou
Wilt not, my brother, curb thy headstrong youth.
THOAS.
I, as becomes the elder, check my rage.
Now answer me: how dost thou prove thyself
The priestess' brother, Agamemnon's son?
ORESTES.
Behold the sword with which the hero slew
The valiant Trojans. From his murderer
I took the weapon, and implor'd the Gods
To grant me Agamemnon's mighty arm,
Success, and valour, with a death more noble.
Select one of the leaders of thy host,
And place the best as my opponent here.
Where'er on earth the sons of heroes dwell,
This boon is to the stranger ne'er refus'd.
THOAS.
This privilege hath ancient custom here
To strangers ne'er accorded.
ORESTES.
Then from us
Commence the novel custom! A whole race
In imitation soon will consecrate
Its monarch's noble action into law.
Nor let me only for our liberty,—
Let me, a stranger, for all strangers fight.
If I should fall, my doom be also theirs;
But if kind fortune crown me with success,
Let none e'er tread this shore, and fail to meet
The beaming eye of sympathy and love,
Or unconsol'd depart!
THOAS.
Thou dost not seem
Unworthy of thy boasted ancestry.
Great is the number of the valiant men
Who wait upon me; but I will myself,
Although advanc'd in years, oppose the foe,
And am prepar'd to try the chance of arms.
IPHIGENIA.
No, no! such bloody proofs are not requir'd.
Unhand thy weapon, king! my lot consider;
Rash combat oft immortalizes man;
If he should fall, he is renown'd in song;
But after ages reckon not the tears
Which ceaseless the forsaken woman sheds;
And poets tell not of the thousand nights
Consum'd in weeping, and the dreary days,
Wherein her anguish't soul, a prey to grief,
Doth vainly yearn to call her lov'd one back.
Fear warn'd me to beware lest robber's wiles
Might lure me from this sanctuary, and then
Betray me into bondage. Anxiously
I question'd them, each circumstance explor'd,
Demanded signs, and now my heart's assur'd.
See here, the mark as of three stars impress'd
On his right hand, which on his natal day
Were by the priest declar'd to indicate
Some dreadful deed by him to be perform'd.
And then this scar, which doth his eyebrow cleave,
Redoubles my conviction. When a child,
Electra, rash and inconsiderate,
Such was her nature, loos'd him from her arms.
He fell against a tripos. Oh, 'tis he!—
Shall I adduce the likeness to his sire,
Or the deep rapture of my inmost heart,
In further token of assurance, king?
THOAS.
E'en though thy words had banish'd every doubt,
And I had curb'd the anger in my breast,
Still must our arms decide. I see no peace.
Their purpose, as thou didst thyself confess,
Was to deprive me of Diana's image.
And think ye that I'll look contented on?
The Greeks are wont to cast a longing eye
Upon the treasures of barbarians,
A golden fleece, good steeds, or daughters fair;
But force and guile not always have avail'd
To lead them, with their booty, safely home.
ORESTES.
The image shall not be a cause of strife!
We now perceive the error which the God,
Our journey here commanding, like a veil,
Threw o'er our minds. His counsel I implor'd,
To free me from the Furies' grisly band.
He answer'd, "Back to Greece the sister bring,
Who in the sanctuary on Tauris' shore
Unwillingly abides; so ends the curse!"
To Phœbus' sister we applied the words,
And he referr'd to thee! The bonds severe,
Which held thee from us, holy one, are rent,
And thou art ours once more. At thy blest touch,
I felt myself restor'd. Within thine arms,
Madness once more around me coil'd its folds,
Crushing the marrow in my frame, and then
For ever, like a serpent, fled to hell.
Through thee, the daylight gladdens me anew.
The counsel of the Goddess now shines forth
In all its beauty and beneficence.
Like to a sacred image, unto which
An oracle immutably hath bound
A city's welfare, thee Diana took,
Protectress of our house, and guarded here
Within this holy stillness, to become
A blessing to thy brother and thy race.
Now when each passage to escape seems clos'd,
And safety hopeless, thou dost give us all.
O king, incline thine heart to thoughts of peace!
Let her fulfil her mission, and complete
The consecration of our father's house.
Me to their purified abode restore,
And place upon my brow the ancient crown!
Requite the blessing which her presence brought thee,
And let me now my nearer right enjoy!
Cunning and force, the proudest boast of man,
Fade in the lustre of her perfect truth;
Nor unrequited will a noble mind
Leave confidence, so childlike and so pure.
IPHIGENIA.
Think on thy promise; let thy heart be mov'd
By what a true and honest tongue hath spoken!
Look on us, king! an opportunity
For such a noble deed not oft occurs.
Refuse thou canst not,—give thy quick consent.
THOAS.
Then go!
IPHIGENIA.
Not so, my king! I cannot part
Without thy blessing, or in anger from thee.
Banish us not! the sacred right of guests
Still let us claim: so not eternally
Shall we be sever'd. Honour'd and belov'd
As mine own father was, art thou by me:
And this impression in my soul remains.
Should e'en the meanest peasant of thy land
Bring to my ear the tones I heard from thee
Or should I on the humblest see thy garb,
I will with joy receive him as a god,
Prepare his couch myself, beside our hearth
Invite him to a seat, and only ask
Touching thy fate and thee. Oh, may the gods
To thee the merited reward impart
Of all thy kindness and benignity!
Farewell! Oh, do not turn away, but give
One kindly word of parting in return!
So shall the wind more gently swell our sails,
And from our eyes with soften'd anguish flow
The tears of separation. Fare thee well!
And graciously extend to me thy hand,
In pledge of ancient friendship.
THOAS, extending his hand.
Fare thee well!


EGMONT
A Tragedy In Five Acts




By
Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
In 1775, when Goethe was twenty-six, and before he went to Weimar, he began to
write "Egmont" After working on it at intervals for twelve years, he finished it at Rome
in 1787.
The scene of the drama is laid in the Low Countries at the beginning of the revolt
against Spain. In the fifteenth century Philip of Burgundy had usurped dominion over
several of the provinces of the Netherlands, and through him they had passed into the
power of his descendant, the Emperor Charles V. This powerful ruler abolished the
constitutional rights of the provinces, and introduced the Inquisition in order to stamp
out Protestantism. Prominent among his officers was the Fleming, Lamoral, Count
Egmont, upon whom he lavished honors and opportunities of service—opportunities
so well improved that, by his victories over the French at Saint-Quentin (1557) and
Gravelines (1558) Egmont made a reputation as one of the most brilliant generals in
Europe, and became the idol of his countrymen. When in 1559 a new Regent of the
Netherlands was to be created, the people hoped that Philip II, who had succeeded
Charles, would choose Egmont; but instead he appointed his half-sister Margaret,
Duchess of Parma. Under the new Regent the persecution of the Protestants was
rigorously pressed, and in 1565 Egmont, though a Catholic, was sent to Madrid to
plead for clemency. He was received by the King with every appearance of cordiality,
but shortly after his return home the Duke of Alva was sent to the Netherlands with
instructions to put down with an iron hand all resistance to his master's will. How
terribly he carried out his orders has been told by Prescott and Motley. Egmont was an
early victim, but his martyrdom, with that of Count Horn, and later the assassination of
William of Orange, roused the Netherlands to a resistance that ended only with the
complete throwing off of the Spanish yoke.
Such in outline is the background chosen by Goethe for his tragedy. With many
changes in detail, the dramatist has still preserved a picture of a historical situation of
absorbing interest, and has painted a group of admirable portraits. The drama has long
been a favorite on the stage, where it enjoys the advantage of Beethoven's musical
setting.
EGMONT
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
 Margaret of Parma, (Daughter of Charles V., and Regent of the
 Netherlands)
 Count Egmont, (Prince of Gaure)
 The Duke of Alva
 William of Orange
 Ferdinand, (his natural Son)
 Machiavel, in the service of the Regent
 Richard, (Egmont's Private Secretary)
 Silva, Gomez, (in the service of Alva)
 Clara, (the Beloved of Egmont)
 Her Mother
 Brackenburg, (a Citizen's Son), and Vansen, (a Clerk)
 Soest, (a Shopkeeper), Jetter, (a Tailor), A Carpenter, A Soapboiler
 (Citizens of Brussels)
 Buyck, (a Hollander), a Soldier under Egmont
 Ruysum, (a Frieslander), an invalid Soldier, and deaf
 People, Attendants, Guards, &c.
 The Scene is laid in Brussels.
ACT I
SCENE I.—Soldiers and Citizens (with cross-bows)
Jetter (steps forward, and bends his cross-bow). Soest, Buyck, Ruysum
Soest. Come, shoot away, and have done with it! You won't beat me! Three black rings,
you never made such a shot in all your life. And so I'm master for this year.
Jetter. Master and king to boot; who envies you? You'll have to pay double reckoning;
'tis only fair you should pay for your dexterity.
Buyck. Jetter, I'll buy your shot, share the prize, and treat the company. I have already
been here so long, and am a debtor for so many civilities. If I miss, then it shall be as if
you had shot.
Soest. I ought to have a voice, for in fact I am the loser. No matter! Come, Buyck, shoot
away.
Buyck (shoots). Now, corporal, look out!—One! Two! Three! Four!
Soest. Four rings! So be it!
All. Hurrah! Long live the King! Hurrah! Hurrah!
Buyck. Thanks, sirs, master even were too much! Thanks for the honour.
Jetter. You have no one to thank but yourself. Ruysum. Let me tell you—
Soest. How now, grey-beard?
Ruysum. Let me tell you!—He shoots like his master, he shoots like Egmont.
Buyck. Compared with him I am only a bungler. He aims with the rifle as no one else
does. Not only when he's lucky or in the vein; no! he levels, and the bull's-eye is
pierced. I have learned from him. He were indeed a blockhead, who could serve under
him and learn nothing!—But, sirs, let us not forget! A king maintains his followers; and
so, wine here, at the king's charge!
Jetter. We have agreed among ourselves that each—
Buyck. I am a foreigner, and a king, and care not a jot for your laws and customs.
Jetter. Why, you are worse than the Spaniard, who has not yet ventured to meddle
with them.
Ruysum. What does he say?
Soest (loud to Ruysum). He wants to treat us; he will not hear of our clubbing together,
the king paying only a double share.
Ruysum. Let him! under protest, however! 'Tis his master's fashion, too, to be
munificent, and to let the money flow in a good cause. (Wine is brought.)
All. Here's to his Majesty! Hurrah!
Jetter (to Buyck). That means your Majesty, of course, Buyck. My hearty thanks, if it be
so.
Soest. Assuredly! A Netherlander does not find it easy to drink the health of his
Spanish majesty from his heart.
Ruysum. Who?
Soest (aloud). Philip the Second, King of Spain.
Ruysum. Our most gracious king and master! Long life to him.
Soest. Did you not like his father, Charles the Fifth, better?
Ruysum. God bless him! He was a king indeed! His hand reached over the whole earth,
and he was all in all. Yet, when he met you, he'd greet you just as one neighbour greets
another,—and if you were frightened, he knew so well how to put you at your ease—
ay, you understand me—he walked out, rode out, just as it came into his head, with
very few followers. We all wept when he resigned the government here to his son. You
understand me—he is another sort of man, he's more majestic.
Jetter. When he was here, he never appeared in public, except in pomp and royal
state. He speaks little, they say.
Soest. He is no king for us Netherlanders. Our princes must be joyous and free like
ourselves, must live and let live. We will neither be despised nor oppressed, goodnatured fools though we be.
Jetter. The king, methinks, were a gracious sovereign enough, if he had only better
counsellors.
Soest. No, no! He has no affection for us Netherlanders; he has no heart for the
people; he loves us not; how then can we love him? Why is everybody so fond of
Count Egmont? Why are we all so devoted to him? Why, because one can read in his
face that he loves us; because joyousness, open-heartedness, and good-nature, speak
in his eyes; because he possesses nothing that he does not share with him who needs
it, ay, and with him who needs it not. Long live Count Egmont! Buyck, it is for you to
give the first toast; give us your master's health.
Buyck. With all my heart; here's to Count Egmont! Hurrah!
Ruysum Conqueror of St. Quintin.
Buyck. The hero of Gravelines.
All. Hurrah!
Ruysum. St. Quintin was my last battle. I was hardly able to crawl along, and could with
difficulty carry my heavy rifle. I managed, notwithstanding, to singe the skin of the
French once more, and, as a parting gift, received a grazing shot in my right leg.
Buyck. Gravelines! Ha, my friends, we had sharp work of it there! The victory was all
our own. Did not those French dogs carry fire and desolation into the very heart of
Flanders? We gave it them, however! The old hard-listed veterans held out bravely for
a while, but we pushed on, fired away, and laid about us, till they made wry faces, and
their lines gave way. Then Egmont's horse was shot under him; and for a long time we
fought pell-mell, man to man, horse to horse, troop to troop, on the broad, flat, seasand. Suddenly, as if from heaven, down came the cannon shot from the mouth of the
river, bang, bang, right into the midst of the French. These were English, who, under
Admiral Malin, happened to be sailing past from Dunkirk. They did not help us much,
'tis true; they could only approach with their smallest vessels, and that not near
enough;—besides, their shot fell sometimes among our troops. It did some good,
however! It broke the French lines, and raised our courage. Away it went. Helter-
skelter! topsy-turvy! all struck dead, or forced into the water; the fellows were
drowned the moment they tasted the water, while we Hollanders dashed in after
them. Being amphibious, we were as much in our element as frogs, and hacked away
at the enemy, and shot them down as if they had been ducks. The few who struggled
through, were struck dead in their flight by the peasant women, armed with hoes and
pitchforks. His Gallic majesty was compelled at once to hold out his paw and make
peace. And that peace you owe to us, to the great Egmont.
All. Hurrah, for the great Egmont! Hurrah! Hurrah!
Jetter. Had they but appointed him Regent, instead of Margaret of Parma!
Soest. Not so! Truth is truth! I'll not hear Margaret abused. Now it is my turn. Long live
our gracious lady!
All. Long life to her!
Soest. Truly, there are excellent women in that family. Long live the Regent!
Jetter. Prudent is she, and moderate in all she does; if she would only not hold so fast
and stiffly with the priests. It is partly her fault, too, that we have the fourteen new
mitres in the land. Of what use are they, I should like to know? Why, that foreigners
may be shoved into the good benefices, where formerly abbots were chosen out of the
chapters! And we're to believe it's for the sake of religion. We know better. Three
bishops were enough for us; things went on decently and reputably. Now each must
busy himself as if he were needed; and this gives rise every moment to dissensions and
ill-will. And the more you agitate the matter, so much the worse it grows. (They drink.)
Soest. But it was the will of the king; she cannot alter it, one way or another.
Jetter. Then we may not even sing the new psalms; but ribald songs, as many as we
please. And why? There is heresy in them, they say, and heaven knows what. I have
sung some of them, however; they are new, to be sure, but I see no harm in them.
Buyck. Ask their leave, forsooth! In our province, we sing just what we please. That's
because Count Egmont is our stadtholder, who does not trouble himself about such
matters. In Ghent, Ypres, and throughout the whole of Flanders, anybody sings them
that chooses. (Aloud to Ruysum.) There is nothing more harmless than a spiritual
song—Is there, father?
Ruysum. What, indeed! It is a godly work, and truly edifying.
Jetter. They say, however, that they are not of the right sort, not of their sort, and,
since it is dangerous, we had better leave them alone. The officers of the Inquisition
are always lurking and spying about; many an honest fellow has already fallen into
their clutches. They had not gone so far as to meddle with conscience! If they will not
allow me to do what I like, they might at least let me think and sing as I please.
Soest. The Inquisition won't do here. We are not made like the Spaniards, to let our
consciences be tyrannized over. The nobles must look to it, and clip its wings betimes.
Jetter. It is a great bore. Whenever it comes into their worships' heads to break into
my house, and I am sitting there at my work, humming a French psalm, thinking
nothing about it, neither good nor bad—singing it just because it is in my throat;—
forthwith I'm a heretic, and am clapped into prison. Or if I am passing through the
country, and stand near a crowd listening to a new preacher, one of those who have
come from Germany; instantly I'm called a rebel, and am in danger of losing my head!
Have you ever heard one of these preachers?
Soest. Brave fellows! Not long ago, I heard one of them preach in a field, before
thousands and thousands of people. A different sort of dish he gave us from that of
our humdrum preachers, who, from the pulpit, choke their hearers with scraps of
Latin. He spoke from his heart; told us how we had till now been led by the nose, how
we had been kept in darkness, and how we might procure more light;—ay, and he
proved it all out of the Bible.
Jetter. There may be something in it. I always said as much, and have often pondered
over the matter. It has long been running in my head.
Buyck. All the people run after them.
Soest. No wonder, since they hear both what is good and what is new.
Jetter. And what is it all about? Surely they might let every one preach after his own
fashion.
Buyck. Come, sirs! While you are talking, you; forget the wine and the Prince of
Orange.
Jetter. We must not forget him. He's a very wall of defence. In thinking of him, one
fancies, that if one could only hide behind him, the devil himself could not get at one.
Here's to William of Orange! Hurrah!
All. Hurrah! Hurrah!
Soest. Now, grey-heard, let's have your toast.
Ruysum. Here's to old soldiers! To all soldiers! War for ever!
Buyck. Bravo, old fellow. Here's to all soldiers. War for ever!
Jetter. War! War! Do ye know what ye are shouting about? That it should slip glibly
from your tongue is natural enough; but what wretched work it is for us, I have not
words to tell you. To be stunned the whole year round by the beating of the drum; to
hear of nothing except how one troop marched here, and another there; how they
came over this height, and halted near that mill; how many were left dead on this field,
and how many on that; how they press forward, and how one wins, and another loses,
without being able to comprehend what they are fighting about; how a town is taken,
how the citizens are put to the sword, and how it fares with the poor women and
innocent children. This is a grief and a trouble, and then one thinks every moment,
"Here they come! It will be our turn next."
Soest. Therefore every citizen must be practised in the use of arms.
Jetter. Fine talking, indeed, for him who has a wife and children. And yet I would rather
hear of soldiers than see them.
Buyck. I might take offence at that.
Jetter. It was not intended for you, countryman. When we got rid of the Spanish
garrison, we breathed freely again.
Soest. Faith! They pressed on you heavily enough.
Jetter. Mind your own business.
Soest. They came to sharp quarters with you.
Jetter. Hold your tongue.
Soest. They drove him out of kitchen, cellar, chamber—and bed. (They laugh.)
Jetter. You are a blockhead.
Buyck. Peace, sirs! Must the soldier cry peace? Since you will not hear anything about
us, let us have a toast of your own—a citizen's toast.
Jetter. We're all ready for that! Safety and peace!
Soest. Order and freedom!
Buyck. Bravo! That will content us all.
(They ring their glasses together, and joyously repeat the words, but in such a manner
that each utters a different sound, and it becomes a kind of chant. The old man listens,
and at length joins in.)
All. Safety and peace! Order and freedom!
SCENE II.—-Palace of the Regent
Margaret of Parma (in a hunting dress). Courtiers, Pages, Servants
Regent. Put off the hunt, I shall not ride to-day. Bid Machiavel attend me.
[Exeunt all but the Regent.
The thought of these terrible events leaves me no repose! Nothing can amuse, nothing
divert my mind. These images, these cares are always before me. The king will now say
that these are the natural fruits of my kindness, of my clemency; yet my conscience
assures me that I have adopted the wisest, the most prudent course. Ought I sooner to
have kindled, and spread abroad these flames with the breath of wrath? My hope was
to keep them in, to let them smoulder in their own ashes. Yes, my inward conviction,
and my knowledge of the circumstances, justify my conduct in my own eyes; but in
what light will it appear to my brother! For, can it be denied that the insolence of these
foreign teachers waxes daily more audacious? They have desecrated our sanctuaries,
unsettled the dull minds of the people, and conjured up amongst them a spirit of
delusion. Impure spirits have mingled among the insurgents, horrible deeds have been
perpetrated, which to think of makes one shudder, and of these a circumstantial
account must be transmitted instantly to court. Prompt and minute must be my
communication, lest rumour outrun my messenger, and the king suspect that some
particulars have been purposely withheld. I can see no means, severe or mild, by which
to stem the evil. Oh, what are we great ones on the waves of humanity? We think to
control them, and are ourselves driven to and fro, hither and thither.
[Enter Machiavel.
Regent. Are the despatches to the king prepared?
Machiavel. In an hour they will be ready for your signature.
Regent. Have you made the report sufficiently circumstantial?
Machiavel. Full and circumstantial, as the king loves to have it. I relate how the rage of
the iconoclasts first broke out at St. Omer. How a furious multitude, with staves,
hatchets, hammers, ladders, and cords, accompanied by a few armed men, first
assailed the chapels, churches, and convents, drove out the worshippers, forced the
barred gates, threw everything into confusion, tore down the altars, destroyed the
statues of the saints, defaced the pictures, and dashed to atoms, and trampled under
foot, whatever came in their way that was consecrated and holy. How the crowd
increased as it advanced, and how the inhabitants of Ypres opened their gates at its
approach. How, with incredible rapidity, they demolished the cathedral, and burned
the library of the bishop. How a vast multitude, possessed by the like frenzy, dispersed
themselves through Menin, Comines, Verviers, Lille, nowhere encountered opposition;
and how, through almost the whole of Flanders, in a single moment, the monstrous
conspiracy declared itself, and was accomplished.
Regent. Alas! Your recital rends my heart anew; and the fear that the evil will wax
greater and greater, adds to my grief. Tell me your thoughts, Machiavel!
Machiavel. Pardon me, your Highness, my thoughts will appear to you but as idle
fancies; and though you always seem well satisfied with my services, you have seldom
felt inclined to follow my advice. How often have you said in jest: "You see too far,
Machiavel! You should be an historian; he who acts, must provide for the exigence of
the hour." And yet have I not predicted this terrible history? Have I not foreseen it all?
Regent. I too foresee many things, without being able to avert them.
Machiavel. In one word, then:—-you will not be able to suppress the new faith. Let it
be recognized, separate its votaries from the true believers, give them churches of
their own, include them within the pale of social order, subject them to the restraints
of law,—do this, and you will at once tranquillize the insurgents. All other measures
will prove abortive, and you will depopulate the country.
Regent. Have you forgotten with what aversion the mere suggestion of toleration was
rejected by my brother? Know you not, how in every letter he urgently recommends to
me the maintenance of the true faith? That he will not hear of tranquility and order
being restored at the expense of religion? Even in the provinces, does he not maintain
spies, unknown to us, in order to ascertain who inclines to the new doctrines? Has he
not, to our astonishment, named to us this or that individual residing in our very
neighbourhood, who, without its being known, was obnoxious to the charge of heresy?
Does he not enjoin harshness and severity? and am I to be lenient? Am I to
recommend for his adoption measures of indulgence and toleration? Should I not thus
lose all credit with him, and at once forfeit his confidence?
Machiavel. I know it. The king commands and puts you in full possession of his
intentions. You are to restore tranquillity and peace by measures which cannot fail still
more to embitter men's minds, and which must inevitably kindle the flames of war
from one extremity of the country to the other. Consider well what you are doing. The
principal merchants are infected—nobles, citizens, soldiers. What avails persisting in
our opinion, when everything is changing around us? Oh, that some good genius would
suggest to Philip that it better becomes a monarch to govern burghers of two different
creeds, than to excite them to mutual destruction.
Regent. Never let me hear such words again. Full well I know that the policy of
statesmen rarely maintains truth and fidelity; that it excludes from the heart candour,
charity, toleration. In secular affairs, this is, alas! only too true; but shall we trifle with
God as we do with each other? Shall we be indifferent to our established faith, for the
sake of which so many have sacrificed their lives? Shall we abandon it to these farfetched, uncertain, and self-contradicting heresies?
Machiavel. Think not the worse of me for what I have uttered.
Regent. I know you and your fidelity. I know too that a man may be both honest and
sagacious, and yet miss the best and nearest way to the salvation of his soul. There are
others, Machiavel, men whom I esteem, yet whom I needs must blame.
Machiavel. To whom do you refer?
Regent. I must confess that Egmont caused me to-day deep and heart-felt annoyance.
Machiavel. How so?
Regent. By his accustomed demeanour, his usual indifference and levity. I received the
fatal tidings as I was leaving church, attended by him and several others. I did not
restrain my anguish, I broke forth into lamentations, loud and deep, and turning to
him, exclaimed, "See what is going on in your province! Do you suffer it, Count, you, in
whom the king confided so implicitly?"
Machiavel. And what was his reply?
Regent. As if it were a mere trifle, an affair of no moment, he answered: "Were the
Netherlanders but satisfied as to their constitution! The rest would soon follow."
Machiavel. There was, perhaps, more truth than discretion or piety in his words. How
can we hope to acquire and to maintain the confidence of the Netherlander, when he
sees that we are more interested in appropriating his possessions, than in promoting
his welfare, temporal or spiritual? Does the number of souls saved by the new bishops
exceed that of the fat benefices they have swallowed? And are they not for the most
part foreigners? As yet, the office of stadtholder has been held by Netherlanders; but
do not the Spaniards betray their great and irresistible desire to possess themselves of
these places? Will not people prefer being governed by their own countrymen, and
according to their ancient customs, rather than by foreigners, who, from their first
entrance into the land, endeavour to enrich themselves at the general expense, who
measure everything by a foreign standard, and who exercise their authority without
cordiality or sympathy?
Regent. You take part with our opponents?
Machiavel. Assuredly not in my heart. Would that with my understanding I could be
wholly on our side!
Regent. If such your disposition, it were better I should resign the regency to them; for
both Egmont and Orange entertained great hopes of occupying this position. Then
they were adversaries, now they are leagued against me, and have become friends—
inseparable friends.
Machiavel. A dangerous pair.
Regent. To speak candidly, I fear Orange.—I fear for Egmont.—Orange meditates some
dangerous scheme, his thoughts are far-reaching, he is reserved, appears to accede to
everything, never contradicts, and while maintaining the show of reverence, with clear
foresight accomplishes his own designs.
Machiavel. Egmont, on the contrary, advances with a bold step, as if the world were all
his own.
Regent. He bears his head as proudly as if the hand of majesty were not suspended
over him.
Machiavel. The eyes of all the people are fixed upon him, and he is the idol of their
hearts.
Regent. He has never assumed the least disguise, and carries himself as if no one had a
right to call him to account. He still bears the name of Egmont. Count Egmont is the
title by which he loves to hear himself addressed, as though he would fain be
reminded that his ancestors were masters of Guelderland. Why does he not assume
his proper title,—Prince of Gaure? What object has he in view? Would he again revive
extinguished claims?
Machiavel. I hold him for a faithful servant of the king.
Regent. Were he so inclined, what important service could he not render to the
government? Whereas, now, without benefiting himself, he has caused us
unspeakable vexation. His banquets and entertainment have done more to unite the
nobles and to knit them together than the most dangerous secret associations. With
his toasts, his guests have drunk in a permanent intoxication, a giddy frenzy, that never
subsides. How often have his facetious jests stirred up the minds of the populace? and
what an excitement was produced among the mob by the new liveries, and the
extravagant devices of his followers!
Machiavel. I am convinced he had no design.
Regent. Be that as it may, it is bad enough. As I said before, he injures us without
benefiting himself. He treats as a jest matters of serious import; and, not to appear
negligent and remiss, we are forced to treat seriously what he intended as a jest. Thus
one urges on the other; and what we are endeavouring to avert is actually brought to
pass. He is more dangerous than the acknowledged head of a conspiracy; and I am
much mistaken if it is not all remembered against him at court. I cannot deny that
scarcely a day passes in which he does not wound me—deeply wound me.
Machiavel. He appears to me to act on all occasions, according to the dictates of his
conscience. Regent. His conscience has a convenient mirror. His demeanour is often
offensive. He carries himself as if he felt he were the master here, and were withheld
by courtesy alone from making us feel his supremacy; as if he would not exactly drive
us out of the country; there'll be no need for that.
Machiavel. I entreat you, put not too harsh a construction upon his frank and joyous
temper, which treats lightly matters of serious moment. You but injure yourself and
him.
Regent. I interpret nothing. I speak only of inevitable consequences, and I know him.
His patent of nobility and the Golden Fleece upon his breast strengthen his confidence,
his audacity. Both can protect him against any sudden outbreak of royal displeasure.
Consider the matter closely, and he is alone responsible for the whole mischief that
has broken out in Flanders. From the first, he connived at the proceedings of the
foreign teachers, avoided stringent measures, and perhaps rejoiced in secret that they
gave us so much to do. Let me alone; on this occasion, I will give utterance to that
which weighs upon my heart; I will not shoot my arrow in vain. I know where he is
vulnerable. For he is vulnerable.
Machiavel. Have you summoned the council? Will Orange attend?
Regent. I have sent for him to Antwerp. I will lay upon their shoulders the burden of
responsibility; they shall either strenuously co-operate with me in quelling the evil, or
at once declare themselves rebels. Let the letters be completed without delay, and
bring them for my signature. Then hasten to despatch the trusty Vasca to Madrid, he is
faithful and indefatigable; let him use all diligence, that he may not be anticipated by
common report, that my brother, may receive the intelligence first through him. I will
myself speak with him ere he departs.
Machiavel. Your orders shall be promptly and punctually obeyed.
SCENE III.—Citizen's House
Clara, her Mother, Brackenburg
Clara. Will you not hold the yarn for me, Brackenburg?
Brackenburg. I entreat you, excuse me, Clara.
Clara. What ails you? Why refuse me this trifling service?
Brackenburg. When I hold the yarn, I stand as it were spell-bound before you, and
cannot escape your eyes.
Clara. Nonsense! Come and hold!
Mother (knitting in her arm-chair). Give us a song! Brackenburg sings so good a
second. You used to be merry once, and I had always something to laugh at.
Brackenburg. Once!
Clara. Well, let us sing.
Brackenburg. As you please.
Clara. Merrily, then, and sing away! 'Tis a soldier's song, my favourite.
(She winds yarn, and sings with Brackenburg.)
 The drum is resounding,
 And shrill the fife plays;
 My love, for the battle,
 His brave troop arrays;
 He lifts his lance high,
 And the people he sways.
 My blood it is boiling!
 My heart throbs pit-pat!
 Oh, had I a jacket,
 With hose and with hat!
 How boldly I'd follow,
 And march through the gate;
 Through all the wide province
 I'd follow him straight.
 The foe yield, we capture
 Or shoot them! Ah, me!
 What heart-thrilling rapture
 A soldier to be!
(During the song, Brackenburg has frequently looked at Clara; at length his voice
falters, his eyes fill with tears, he lets the skein fall, and goes to the window. Clara
finishes the song alone, her Mother motions to her, half displeased, she rises,
advances a few steps towards him, turns back, as if irresolute, and again sits down.)
Mother. What is going on in the street, Brackenburg? I hear soldiers marching.
Brackenburg. It is the Regent's body-guard.
Clara. At this hour? What can it mean? (She rises and joins Brackenburg at the
window.) That is not the daily guard; it is more numerous! almost all the troops! Oh,
Brackenburg, go! Learn what it means. It must be something unusual. Go, good
Brackenburg, do me this favour.
Brackenburg. I am going! I will return immediately. (He offers his hand to Clara, and
she gives him hers.)
[Exit Brackenburg.
Mother. Thou sendest him away so soon!
Clara. I am curious; and, besides—do not be angry, Mother—his presence pains me. I
never know how I ought to behave towards him. I have done him a wrong, and it goes
to my very heart to see how deeply he feels it. Well, it can't be helped now!
Mother. He is such a true-hearted fellow!
Clara. I cannot help it, I must treat him kindly. Often without a thought, I return the
gentle, loving pressure of his hand. I reproach myself that I am deceiving him, that I am
nourishing in his heart a vain hope. I am in a sad plight! God knows, I do not willingly
deceive him. I do not wish him to hope, yet I cannot let him despair!
Mother. That is not as it should be.
Clara. I liked him once, and in my soul I like him still I could have married him; yet I
believe I was never really in love with him.
Mother. Thou wouldst always have been happy with him.
Clara. I should have been provided for, and have led a quiet life.
Mother. And through thy fault it has all been trifled away.
Clara, I am in a strange position. When I think how it has come to pass, I know it,
indeed, and I know it not. But I have only to look upon Egmont, and I understand it all;
ay, and stranger things would seem natural then. Oh, what a man he is! All the
provinces worship him. And in his arms, should I not be the happiest creature in the
world?
Mother. And how will it be in the future?
Clara. I only ask, does he love me?—does he love me?—as if there were any doubt
about it.
Mother. One has nothing but anxiety of heart with one's children. Always care and
sorrow, whatever may be the end of it! It cannot come to good! Thou hast made
thyself wretched! Thou hast made thy Mother wretched too.
Clara (quietly). Yet thou didst allow it in the beginning.
Mother. Alas! I was too indulgent; I am always too indulgent.
Clara. When Egmont rode by, and I ran to the window, did you chide me then? Did you
not come to the window yourself? When he looked up, smiled, nodded, and greeted
me, was it displeasing to you? Did you not feel yourself honoured in your daughter?
Mother. Go on with your reproaches.
Clara (with emotion). Then, when he passed more frequently, and we felt sure that it
was on my account that he came this way, did you not remark it yourself with secret
joy? Did you call me away when I stood behind the window-pane and awaited him?
Mother. Could I imagine that it would go so far?
Clara (with faltering voice, and repressed tears). And then, one evening, when,
enveloped in his mantle, he surprised us as we sat at our lamp, who busied herself in
receiving him, while I remained, lost in astonishment, as if fastened to my chair?
Mother. Could I imagine that the prudent Clara would so soon be carried away by this
unhappy love? I must now endure that my daughter—
Clara (bursting into tears). Mother! How can you? You take pleasure in tormenting me!
Mother (weeping). Ay, weep away! Make me yet more wretched by thy grief. Is it not
misery enough that my only daughter is a castaway?
Clara (rising, and speaking coldly). A castaway! The beloved of Egmont a castaway!—
What princess would not envy the poor Clara a place in his heart? Oh, Mother,—my
own Mother, you were not wont to speak thus! Dear Mother, be kind!—Let the people
think, let the neighbours whisper what they like—this chamber, this lowly house is a
paradise, since Egmont's love dwelt here.
Mother. One cannot help liking him, that is true. He is always so kind, frank, and openhearted.
Clara. There is not a drop of false blood in his veins. And then, Mother, he is indeed the
great Egmont; yet, when he comes to me, how tender he is, how kind! How he tries to
conceal from me his rank, his bravery! How anxious he is about me! so entirely the
man, the friend, the lover.
Mother. DO you expect him to-day?
Clara. Have you not seen how often I go to the window? Have you not noticed how I
listen to every noise at the door?—Though I know that he will not come before night,
yet, from the time when I rise in the morning, I keep expecting him every moment.
Were I but a boy, to follow him always, to the court and everywhere! Could I but carry
his colours in the field—!
Mother. You were always such a lively, restless creature; even as a little child, now
wild, now thoughtful. Will you not dress yourself a little better?
Clara. Perhaps, Mother, if I want something to do.—Yesterday, some of his people
went by, singing songs in honour. At least his name was in the songs! The rest I could
not understand. My heart leaped up into my throat,—I would fain have called them
back if I had not felt ashamed.
Mother. Take care! Thy impetuous nature will ruin all. Thou wilt betray thyself before
the people; as, not long ago, at thy cousin's, when thou roundest out the woodcut with
the description, and didst exclaim, with a cry: "Count Egmont!"—I grew as red as fire.
Clara. Could I help crying out? It was the battle of Gravelines, and I found in the picture
the letter C. and then looked for it in the description below. There it stood, "Count
Egmont, with his horse shot under him." I shuddered, and afterwards I could not help
laughing at the woodcut figure of Egmont, as tall as the neighbouring tower of
Gravelines, and the English ships at the side.—When I remember how I used to
conceive of a battle, and what an idea I had, as a girl, of Count Egmont; when I listened
to descriptions of him, and of all the other earls and princes;—and think how it is with
me now!
[Enter Brackenburg.
Clara. Well, what is going on?
Brackenburg. Nothing certain is known. It is rumoured that an insurrection has lately
broken out in Flanders; the Regent is afraid of its spreading here. The castle is strongly
garrisoned, the burghers are crowding to the gates, and the streets are thronged with
people. I will hasten at once to my old father. (As if about to go.)
Clara. Shall we see you to-morrow? I must change my dress a little. I am expecting my
cousin, and I look too untidy. Come, Mother, help me a moment. Take the book,
Brackenburg, and bring me such another story.
Mother. Farewell.
Brackenburg (extending his hand). Your hand.
Clara (refusing hers). When you come next.
[Exeunt Mother and DAUGHTER.
Brackenburg (alone). I had resolved to go away again at once; and yet, when she takes
me at my word, and lets me leave her, I feel as if I could go mad,—Wretched man!
Does the fate of thy fatherland, does the growing disturbance fail to move thee?—Are
countryman and Spaniard the same to thee? and carest thou not who rules, and who is
in the right? I wad a different sort of fellow as a schoolboy!—Then, when an exercise in
oratory was given; "Brutus' Speech for Liberty," for instance, Fritz was ever the first,
and the rector would say: "If it were only spoken more deliberately, the words not all
huddled together."—Then my blood boiled, and longed for action.—Now I drag along,
bound by the eyes of a maiden. I cannot leave her! yet she, alas, cannot love me!—
ah—no—-she—she cannot have entirely rejected me—not entirely—yet half love is no
love!—I will endure it no longer!—Can it be true what a friend lately whispered in my
ear, that she secretly admits a man into the house by night, when she always sends me
away modestly before evening? No, it cannot be true! It is a lie! A base, slanderous lie!
Clara is as innocent as I am wretched.—She has rejected me, has thrust me from her
heart—and shall I live on thus? I cannot, I will not endure it. Already my native land is
convulsed by internal strife, and do I perish abjectly amid the tumult? I will not endure
it! When the trumpet sounds, when a shot falls, it thrills through my bone and
marrow! But, alas, it does not rouse me! It does not summon me to join the onslaught,
to rescue, to dare.—Wretched, degrading position! Better end it at once! Not long ago,
I threw myself into the water; I sank—but nature in her agony was too strong for me; I
felt that I could swim, and saved myself against my will. Could I but forget the time
when she loved me, seemed to love me!—Why has this happiness penetrated my very
bone and marrow? Why have these hopes, while disclosing to me a distant paradise,
consumed all the enjoyment of life?—And that first, that only kiss!—Here (laying his
hand upon the table), here we were alone,—she had always been kind and friendly
towards me,—then she seemed to soften,—she looked at me,—my brain reeled,—I
felt her lips on mine,—and—and now?—Die, wretch! Why dost thou hesitate? (He
draws a phial from his pocket.) Thou healing poison, it shall not have been in vain that I
stole thee from my brother's medicine chest! From this anxious fear, this dizziness, this
death-agony, thou shalt deliver me at once.
ACT II
SCENE I.—Square in Brussels
Jetter and a Master Carpenter (meeting)
Carpenter. Did I not tell you beforehand? Eight days ago, at the guild, I said there
would be serious disturbances?
Jetter. Is it, then, true that they have plundered the churches in Flanders?
Carpenter. They have utterly destroyed both churches and chapels. They have left
nothing standing but the four bare walls. The lowest rabble! And this it is that damages
our good cause. We ought rather to have laid our claims before the Regent, formally
and decidedly, and then have stood by them. If we speak now, if we assemble now, it
will be said that we are joining the insurgents.
Jetter. Ay, so every one thinks at first. Why should you thrust your nose into the mess?
The neck is closely connected with it.
Carpenter. I am always uneasy when tumults arise among the mob—among people
who have nothing to lose. They use as a pretext that to which we also must appeal,
and plunge the country in misery.
[Enter Soest.
Soest. Good day, sirs! What news? Is it true that the image-breakers are coming
straight in this direction?
Carpenter. Here they shall touch nothing, at any rate.
Soest. A soldier came into my shop just now to buy tobacco; I questioned him about
the matter. The Regent, though so brave and prudent a lady, has for once lost her
presence of mind. Things must be bad indeed when she thus takes refuge behind her
guards. The castle is strongly garrisoned. It is even rumoured that she means to fly
from the town.
Carpenter. Forth she shall not go! Her presence protects us, and we will ensure her
safety better than her mustachioed gentry. If she only maintains our rights and
privileges, we will stand faithfully by her.
[Enter a Soapboiler.
Soapboiler. An ugly business this! a bad business! Troubles are beginning; all things are
going wrong! Mind you keep quiet, or they'll take you also for rioters.
Soest. Here come the seven wise men of Greece.
Soapboiler. I know there are many who in secret hold with the Calvinists, abuse the
bishops, and care not for the king. But a loyal subject, a sincere Catholic—!
(By degrees others join the speakers, and listen.)
[Enter Vansen.
Vansen. God save you, sirs! What news?
Carpenter. Have nothing to do with him, he's a dangerous fellow.
Jetter. Is he not secretary to Dr. Wiets?
Carpenter. He has already had several masters. First he was a clerk, and as one patron
after another turned him off, on account of his roguish tricks, he now dabbles in the
business of notary and advocate, and is a brandy-drinker to boot. (More people gather
round and stand in groups.)
Vansen. So here you are, putting your heads together. Well, it is worth talking about.
Soest. I think so too.
Vansen. Now if only one of you had heart and another head enough for the work, we
might break the Spanish fetters at once.
Soest. Sirs! you must not talk thus. We have taken our oath to the king.
Vansen. And the king to us. Mark that!
Jetter. There's sense in that? Tell us your opinion.
Others. Hearken to him; he's a clever fellow. He's sharp enough. I had an old master
once, who possessed a collection of parchments, among which were charters of
ancient constitutions, contracts, and privileges. He set great store, too, by the rarest
books. One of these contained our whole constitution; how, at first, we Netherlanders
had princes of our own, who governed according to hereditary laws, rights, and
usages; how our ancestors paid due honour to their sovereign so long as he governed
them equitably; and how they were immediately on their guard the moment he was
for overstepping his bounds. The states were down upon him at once; for every
province, however small, had its own chamber and representatives.
Carpenter. Hold your tongue! We knew that long ago! Every honest citizen learns as
much about the constitution as he needs.
Jetter. Let him speak; one may always learn something.
Soest. He is quite right.
Several Citizens. Go on! Go on! One does not hear this every day.
Vansen. You citizens, forsooth! You live only in the present; and as you tamely follow
the trade inherited from your fathers, so you let the government do with you just as it
pleases. You make no inquiry into the origin, the history, or the rights of a Regent; and
in consequence of this negligence, the Spaniard has drawn the net over your ears.
Soest. Who cares for that, if one has only daily bread?
Jetter. The devil! Why did not some one come forward and tell us this in time?
Vansen. I tell it you now. The King of Spain, whose good fortune it is to bear sway over
these provinces, has no right to govern them otherwise than the petty princes who
formerly possessed them separately. Do you understand that?
Jetter. Explain it to us.
Vansen. Why, it is as dear as the sun. Must you not be governed according to your
provincial laws? How comes that?
A Citizen. Certainly!
Vansen. Has not the burgher of Brussels a different law from the burgher of Antwerp?
The burgher of Antwerp from the burgher of Ghent? How comes that?
Another Citizen. By heavens!
Vansen. But if you let matters run on thus, they will soon tell you a different story. Fie
on you! Philip, through a woman, now ventures to do what neither Charles the Bold,
Frederick the Warrior, nor Charles the Fifth could accomplish.
Soest. Yes, yes! The old princes tried it also.
Vansen. Ay! But our ancestors kept a sharp look-out. If they thought themselves
aggrieved by their sovereign, they would perhaps get his son and heir into their hands,
detain him as a hostage, and surrender him only on the most favourable conditions.
Our fathers were men! They knew their own interests! They knew how to lay hold on
what they wanted, and to get it established! They were men of the right sort! and
hence it is that our privileges are so dearly defined, our liberties so well secured.
Soest. What are you saying about our liberties?
All. Our liberties! our privileges! Tell us about our privileges.
Vansen. All the provinces have their peculiar advantages, but we of Brabant are the
most splendidly provided for. I have read it all.
Soest. Say on.
Jetter. Let us hear.
A Citizen. Pray do.
Vansen. First, it stands written:—The Duke of Brabant shall be to us a good and faithful
sovereign.
Soest. Good! Stands it so?
Jetter. Faithful? Is that true?
Vansen. As I tell you. He is bound to us as we are to him. Secondly: In the exercise of
his authority he shall neither exert arbitrary power, nor exhibit caprice, himself, nor
shall he, either directly or indirectly, sanction them in others.
Jetter. Bravo! Bravo! Not exert arbitrary power.
Soest. Nor exhibit caprice.
Another. And not sanction them in others! That is the main point. Not sanction them,
either directly or indirectly.
Vansen. In express words.
Jetter. Get us the book.
A Citizen. Yes, we must see it.
Others. The book! The book!
Another. We will to the Regent with the book.
Another. Sir doctor, you shall be spokesman.
Soapboiler. Oh, the dolts!
Others. Something more out of the book!
Soapboiler. I'll knock his teeth down his throat if he says another word.
People. We'll see who dares to lay hands upon him. Tell us about our privileges! Have
we any more privileges?
Vansen. Many, very good and very wholesome ones too. Thus it stands: The sovereign
shall neither benefit the clergy, nor increase their number, without the consent of the
nobles and of the states. Mark that! Nor shall he alter the constitution of the country.
Soest. Stands it so?
Vansen. I'll show it you, as it was written down two or three centuries ago.
A Citizen. And we tolerate the new bishops? The nobles must protect us, we will make
a row else!
Others. And we suffer ourselves to be intimidated by the Inquisition?
Vansen. It is your own fault.
People. We have Egmont! We have Orange! They will protect our interests.
Vansen. Your brothers in Flanders are beginning the good work.
Soapboiler. Dog! (Strikes him.)
(Others oppose the Soapboiler, and exclaim,) Are you also a Spaniard?
Another. What! This honourable man?
Another. This learned man?
(They attack the Soapboiler.)
Carpenter. For heaven's sake, peace!
(Others mingle in the fray.)
Carpenter. Citizens, what means this?
(Boys whistle, throw stones, set on dogs; citizens stand and gape, people come running
up, others walk quietly to and fro, others play all sorts of pranks, shout and huzza.)
Others. Freedom and privilege! Privilege and freedom!
[Enter Egmont, with followers.
Egmont. Peace! Peace! good people. What is the matter? Peace, I say! Separate them.
Carpenter. My good lord, you come like an angel from heaven. Hush! See you nothing?
Count Egmont! Honour to Count Egmont!
Egmont. Here, too! What are you about? Burgher against burgher! Does not even the
neighbourhood of our royal mistress oppose a barrier to this frenzy? Disperse
yourselves, and go about your business. 'Tis a bad sign when you thus keep holiday on
working days. How did the disturbance begin?
(The tumult gradually subsides, and the people gather around Egmont.)
Carpenter. They are fighting about their privileges.
Egmont. Which they will forfeit through their own folly,—and who are you? You seem
honest people.
Carpenter. 'Tis our wish to be so.
Egmont. Your calling?
Carpenter. A Carpenter, and master of the guild.
Egmont. And you?
Soest. A shopkeeper.
Egmont. And you?
Jetter. A tailor.
Egmont. I remember, you were employed upon the liveries of my people. Your name is
Jetter.
Jetter. To think of your grace remembering it!
Egmont. I do not easily forget any one whom I have seen or conversed with. Do what
you can, good people, to keep the peace; you stand in bad repute enough already.
Provoke not the king still farther. The power, after all, is in his hands. An honest
burgher, who maintains himself industriously, has everywhere as much freedom as he
wants.
Carpenter. That now is just our misfortune! With all due deference, your grace, 'tis the
idle portion of the community, your drunkards and vagabonds, who quarrel for want of
something to do, and clamour about privilege because they are hungry; they impose
upon the curious and the credulous, and, in order to obtain a pot of beer, excite
disturbances that will bring misery upon thousands. That is just what they want. We
keep our houses and chests too well guarded; they would fain drive us away from
them with fire-brands.
Egmont. You shall have all needful assistance; measures have been taken to stem the
evil by force. Make a firm stand against the new doctrines, and do not imagine that
privileges are secured by sedition, Remain at home; suffer no crowds to assemble in
the streets. Sensible people can accomplish much.
(In the meantime the crowd has for the most part dispersed.)
Carpenter. Thanks, your excellency—thanks for your good opinion! We will do what in
us lies. (Exit Egmont.) A gracious lord! A true Netherlander! Nothing of the Spaniard
about him.
Jetter. If we had only him for a Regent? 'Tis a pleasure to follow him.
Soest. The king won't hear of that. He takes care to appoint his own people to the
place.
Jetter. Did you notice his dress? It was of the newest fashion—after the Spanish cut.
Carpenter. A handsome gentleman.
Jetter. His head now were a dainty morsel for a heads-man.
Soest. Are you mad? What are you thinking about?
Jetter. It is stupid enough that such an idea should come into one's head! But so it is.
Whenever I see a fine long neck, I cannot help thinking how well it would suit the
block. These cursed executions! One cannot get them out of one's head. When the
lads are swimming, and I chance to see a naked back, I think forthwith of the dozens I
have seen beaten with rods. If I meet a portly gentleman, I fancy I already see him
roasting at the stake. At night, in my dreams, I am tortured in every limb; one cannot
have a single hour's enjoyment; all merriment and fun have long been forgotten. These
terrible images seem burnt in upon my brain.
SCENE II.—Egmont's residence
His Secretary (at a desk with papers. He rises impatiently)
Secretary. Still he comes not! And I have been waiting already full two hours, pen in
hand, the paper before me; and just to-day I was anxious to be out so early. The floor
burns under my feet. I can with difficulty restrain my impatience. "Be punctual to the
hour:" Such was his parting injunction; now he comes not. There is so much business
to get through, I shall not have finished before midnight. He overlooks one's faults, it is
true; methinks it would be better though, were he more strict, so he dismissed one at
the appointed time. One could then arrange one's plans. It is now full two hours since
he left the Regent; who knows whom he may have chanced to meet by the way?
[Enter Egmont.
Egmont. Well, how do matters look?
Secretary. I am ready, and three couriers are waiting.
Egmont. I have detained you too long; you look somewhat out of humour.
Secretary. In obedience to your command I have already been in attendance for some
time. Here are the papers!
Egmont. Donna Elvira will be angry with me, when she learns that I have detained you.
Secretary. You are pleased to jest.
Egmont. No, no. Be not ashamed. I admire your taste. She is pretty, and I have no
objection that you should have a friend at the castle. What say the letters?
Secretary. Much, my lord, but withal little that is satisfactory.
Egmont. 'Tis well that we have pleasures at home, we have the less occasion to seek
them from abroad. Is there much that requires attention?
Secretary. Enough, my lord; three couriers are in attendance.
Egmont. Proceed! The most important.
Secretary. All is important.
Egmont. One after the other; only be prompt.
Secretary. Captain Breda sends an account of the occurrences that have further taken
place in Ghent and the surrounding districts. The tumult is for the most part allayed.
Egmont. He doubtless reports individual acts of folly and temerity?
Secretary. He does, my lord.
Egmont. Spare me the recital.
Secretary. Six of the mob who tore down the image of the Virgin at Verviers have been
arrested. He inquires whether they are to be hanged like the others.
Egmont. I am weary of hanging; let them be flogged and discharged.
Secretary. There are two women among them; are they to be flogged also?
Egmont. He may admonish them and let them go.
Secretary. Brink, of Breda's company, wants to marry; the captain hopes you will not
allow it. There are so many women among the troops, he writes, that when on the
march, they resemble a gang of gypsies rather than regular soldiers.
Egmont. We must overlook it in his case. He is a fine young fellow, and moreover
entreated me so earnestly before I came away. This must be the last time, however;
though it grieves me to refuse the poor fellows their best pastime; they have enough
without that to torment them.
Secretary. Two of your people, Seter and Hart, have ill-treated a damsel, the daughter
of an inn-keeper. They got her alone and she could not escape from them.
Egmont. If she be an honest maiden and they used violence, let them be flogged three
days in succession; and if they have any property, let him retain as much of it as will
portion the girl.
Secretary. One of the foreign preachers has been discovered passing secretly through
Comines. He swore that he was on the point of leaving for France. According to orders,
he ought to be beheaded.
Egmont. Let him be conducted quietly to the frontier, and there admonished that, the
next time, he will not escape so easily.
Secretary. A letter from your steward. He writes that money comes in slowly, he can
with difficulty send you the required sum within the week; the late disturbances have
thrown everything into the greatest confusion.
Egmont. Money must be had! It is for him to look to the means.
Secretary. He says he will do his utmost, and at length proposes to sue and imprison
Raymond, who has been so long in your debt.
Egmont. But he has promised to pay!
Secretary. The last time he fixed a fortnight himself.
Egmont. Well, grant him another fortnight; after that he may proceed against him.
Secretary. You do well. His non-payment of the money proceeds not from inability, but
from want of inclination. He will trifle no longer when he sees that you are in earnest.
The steward further proposes to withhold, for half a month, the pensions which you
allow to the old soldiers, widows, and others. In the meantime some expedient may be
devised; they must make their arrangements accordingly.
Egmont. But what arrangements can be made here? These poor people want the
money more than I do. He must not think of it.
Secretary. How then, my lord, is he to raise the required sum?
Egmont. It is his business to think of that. He was told so in a former letter.
Secretary. And therefore he makes these proposals.
Egmont. They will never do;—he must think of something else. Let him suggest
expedients that are admissible, and, before all, let him procure the money.
Secretary. I have again before me the letter from Count Oliva. Pardon my recalling it to
your remembrance. Before all others, the aged count deserves a detailed reply. You
proposed writing to him with your own hand. Doubtless, he loves you as a father.
Egmont. I cannot command the time;—and of all detestable things, writing is to me the
most detestable. You imitate my hand so admirably, do you write in my name. I am
expecting Orange. I cannot do it;—I wish, however, that something soothing should be
written, to allay his fears.
Secretary. Just give me a notion of what you wish to communicate; I will at once draw
up the answer, and lay it before you. It shall be so written that it might pass for your
hand in a court of justice.
Egmont. Give me the letter. (After glancing over it.) Dear, excellent, old man! Wert
thou then so cautious in thy youth? Didst thou never mount a breach? Didst thou
remain in the rear of battle at the suggestion of prudence?—What affectionate
solicitude! He has indeed my safety and happiness at heart, but considers not, that he
who lives but to save his life, is already dead.—Charge him not to be anxious on my
account; I act as circumstances require, and shall be upon my guard. Let him use his
influence at court in my favour, and be assured of my warmest thanks.
Secretary. Is that all? He expects still more.
Egmont. What can I say? If you choose to write more fully, do so. The matter turns
upon a single point; he would have me live as I cannot live. That I am joyous, live fast,
take matters easily, is my good fortune; nor would! exchange it for the safety of a
sepulchre. My blood rebels against the Spanish mode of life, nor have I the least
inclination to regulate my movements by the new and cautious measures of the court.
Do I live only to think of life? Am I to forego the enjoyment of the present moment in
order to secure the next? And must that in its turn be consumed in anxieties and idle
fears?
Secretary. I entreat you, my lord, be not so harsh towards the venerable man. You are
wont to be friendly towards every one. Say a kindly word to allay the anxiety of your
noble friend. See how considerate he is, with what delicacy he warns you.
Egmont. Yet he harps continually on the same string. He knows of old how I detest
these admonitions. They serve only to perplex and are of no avail. What if I were a
somnambulist, and trod the giddy summit of a lofty house,—were it the part of
friendship to call me by my name, to warn me of my danger, to waken, to kill me? Let
each choose his own path, and provide for his own safety.
Secretary. It may become you to be without a fear, but those who know and love
you—
Egmont (looking over the letter). Then he recalls the old story of our sayings and
doings, one evening, in the wantonness of conviviality and wine; and what conclusions
and inferences were thence drawn and circulated throughout the whole kingdom!
Well, we had a cap and bells embroidered on the sleeves of our servants' liveries, and
afterwards exchanged this senseless device for a bundle of arrows;—a still more
dangerous symbol for those who are bent upon discovering a meaning where nothing
is meant, These and similar follies were conceived and brought forth in a moment of
merriment. It was at our suggestion that a noble troop, with beggars' wallets, and a
self-chosen nickname, with mock humility recalled the King's duty to his remembrance.
It was at our suggestion too—well, what does it signify? Is a carnival jest to be
construed into high treason? Are we to be grudged the scanty, variegated rags,
wherewith a youthful spirit and heated imagination would adorn the poor nakedness
of life? Take life too seriously, and what is it worth? If the morning wake us to no new
joys, if in the evening we have no pleasures to hope for, is it worth the trouble of
dressing and undressing? Does the sun shine on me to-day, that I may reflect on what
happened yesterday? That I may endeavour to foresee and control, what can neither
be foreseen nor controlled,—the destiny of the morrow? Spare me these reflections,
we will leave them to scholars and courtiers. Let them ponder and contrive, creep
hither and thither, and surreptitiously achieve their ends.—If you can make use of
these suggestions, without swelling your letter into a volume, it is well. Everything
appears of exaggerated importance to the good old man. 'Tis thus the friend, who has
long held our hand, grasps it more warmly ere he quits his hold.
Secretary. Pardon me, the pedestrian grows dizzy when he beholds the charioteer
drive past with whirling speed.
Egmont. Child! Child! Forbear! As if goaded by invisible spirits, the sun-steeds of time
bear onward the light car of our destiny; and nothing remains for us but, with calm
self-possession, firmly to grasp the reins, and now right, now left, to steer the wheels
here from the precipice and there from the rock. Whither he is hasting, who knows?
Does any one consider whence he came?
Secretary. My lord! my lord!
Egmont. I stand high, but I can and must rise yet higher. Courage, strength, and hope
possess my soul. Not yet have I attained the height of my ambition; that once
achieved, I will stand firmly and without fear. Should I fall, should a thunder-clap, a
storm-blast, ay, a false step of my own, precipitate me into the abyss, so be it! I shall
lie there with thousands of others. I have never disdained, even for a trifling stake, to
throw the bloody die with my gallant comrades; and shall I hesitate now, when all that
is most precious in life is set upon the cast?
Secretary. Oh, my lord! you know not what you say! May Heaven protect you!
Egmont Collect your papers. Orange is coming. Dispatch what is most urgent, that the
couriers may set forth before the gates are closed. The rest may wait. Leave the
Count's letter till to-morrow. Fail not to visit Elvira, and greet her from me. Inform
yourself concerning the Regent's health. She cannot be well, though she would fain
conceal it.
[Exit Secretary.
[Enter Orange.
Egmont. Welcome, Orange; you appear somewhat disturbed.
Orange. What say you to our conference with the Regent?
Egmont. I found nothing extraordinary in her manner of receiving us. I have often seen
her thus before. She appeared to me to be somewhat indisposed.
Orange. Marked you not that she was more reserved than usual? She began by
cautiously approving our conduct during the late insurrection; glanced at the false light
in which, nevertheless, it might be viewed; and finally turned the discourse to her
favourite topic—that her gracious demeanour, her friendship for us Netherlanders,
had never been sufficiently recognized, never appreciated as it deserved; that nothing
came to a prosperous issue; that for her part she was beginning to grow weary of it;
that the king must at last resolve upon other measures. Did you hear that?
Egmont. Not all; I was thinking at the time of something else. She is a woman, good
Orange, and all women expect that every one shall submit passively to their gentle
yoke; that every Hercules shall lay aside his lion's skin, assume the distaff, and swell
their train; and, because they are themselves peaceably inclined, imagine forsooth,
that the ferment which seizes a nation, the storm which powerful rivals excite against
one another, may be allayed by one soothing word, and the most discordant elements
be brought to unite in tranquil harmony at their feet. 'Tis thus with her; and since she
cannot accomplish her object, why she has no resource left but to lose her temper, to
menace us with direful prospects for the future, and to threaten to take her departure.
Orange. Think you not that this time she will fulfil her threat?
Egmont. Never! How often have I seen her actually prepared for the journey? Whither
should she go? Being here a stadtholder, a queen, think you that she could endure to
spend her days in insignificance at her brother's court, or to repair to Italy, and there
drag on her existence among her old family connections?
Orange. She is held incapable of this determination, because you have already seen
her hesitate and draw back; nevertheless, it lies in her to take this step; new
circumstances may impel her to the long-delayed resolve. What if she were to depart,
and the king to send another?
Egmont. Why, he would come, and he also would have business enough upon his
hands. He would arrive with vast projects and schemes to reduce all things to order, to
subjugate and combine; and to-day he would be occupied with this trifle, to-morrow
with that, and the day following have to deal with some unexpected hindrance. He
would spend one month in forming plans, another in mortification at their failure, and
half a year would be consumed in cares for a single province. With him also time would
pass, his head grow dizzy, and things hold on their ordinary course, till instead of
sailing into the open sea, according to the plan which he had previously marked out,
he might thank if, amid the tempest, he were able to keep his vessel off the rocks.
Orange. What if the king were advised to try an experiment?
Egmont. Which should be—?
Orange. To try how the body would get on without the head.
Egmont. How?
Orange. Egmont, our interests have for years weighed upon my heart; I ever stand as
over a chess-board, and regard no move of my adversary as insignificant; and as men
of science carefully investigate the secrets of nature, so I hold it to be the duty, ay, the
very vocation of a prince, to acquaint himself with the dispositions and intentions of all
parties. I have reason to fear an outbreak. The king has long acted according to certain
principles; he finds that they do not lead to a prosperous issue; what more probable
than that he should seek it some other way?
Egmont. I do not believe it. When a man grows old, has attempted much, and finds
that the world cannot be made to move according to his will, he must needs grow
weary of it at last.
Orange. One thing has yet to be attempted.
Egmont. What?
Orange. To spare the people, and to put an end to the princes.
Egmont. How many have long been haunted by this dread? There is no cause for such
anxiety.
Orange. Once I felt anxious; gradually I became suspicious; suspicion has at length
grown into certainty.
Egmont. Has the king more faithful servants than ourselves?
Orange. We serve him after our own fashion; and, between ourselves, it must be
confessed that we understand pretty well how to make the interests of the king square
with our own.
Egmont. And who does not? He has our duty and submission, in so far as they are his
due.
Orange. But what if he should arrogate still more, and regard as disloyalty what we
esteem the maintenance of our just rights?
Egmont. We shall know in that case how to defend ourselves. Let him assemble the
Knights of the Golden Fleece; we will submit ourselves to their decision.
Orange. What if the sentence were to precede the trial? punishment, the sentence?
Egmont. It were an injustice of which Philip is incapable; a folly which I cannot impute
either to him or to his counsellors.
Orange. And how if they were both unjust and foolish?
Egmont. No, Orange, it is impossible. Who would venture to lay hands on us? The
attempt to capture us were a vain and fruitless enterprize. No, they dare not raise the
standard of tyranny so high. The breeze that should waft these tidings over the land
would kindle a mighty conflagration. And what object would they have in view? The
king alone has no power either to judge or to condemn us and would they attempt our
lives by assassination? They cannot intend it. A terrible league would unite the entire
people. Direful hate and eternal separation from the crown of Spain would, on the
instant, be forcibly declared.
Orange. The flames would then rage over our grave, and the blood of our enemies
flow, a vain oblation. Let us consider, Egmont.
Egmont. But how could they effect this purpose?
Orange. Alva is on the way.
Egmont. I do not believe it.
Orange. I know it.
Egmont. The Regent appeared to know nothing of it.
Orange. And, therefore, the stronger is my conviction. The Regent will give place to
him. I know his blood-thirsty disposition, and he brings an army with him.
Egmont. To harass the provinces anew? The people will be exasperated to the last
degree.
Orange. Their leaders will be secured.
Egmont. No! No!
Orange. Let us retire, each to his province. There we can strengthen ourselves; the
Duke will not begin with open violence.
Egmont. Must we not greet him when he comes?
Orange. We will delay.
Egmont. What if, on his arrival, he should summon us in the king's name?
Orange. We will answer evasively.
Egmont. And if he is urgent?
Orange. We will excuse ourselves.
Egmont. And if he insist?
Orange. We shall be the less disposed to come.
Egmont. Then war is declared; and we are rebels. Do not suffer prudence to mislead
you, Orange. I know it is not fear that makes you yield. Consider this step.
Orange. I have considered it.
Egmont. Consider for what you are answerable if you are wrong. For the most fatal
war that ever yet desolated a country. Your refusal is the signal that at once summons
the provinces to arms, that justifies every cruelty for which Spain has hitherto so
anxiously sought a pretext. With a single nod you will excite to the direst confusion
what, with patient effort, we have so long kept in abeyance. Think of the towns, the
nobles, the people; think of commerce, agriculture, trade! Realize the murder, the
desolation! Calmly the soldier beholds his comrade fall beside him in the battlefield.
But towards you, carried downwards by the stream, shall float the corpses of citizens,
of children, of maidens, till, aghast with horror, you shall no longer know whose cause
you are defending, since you shall see those, for whose liberty you drew the sword,
perishing around you. And what will be your emotions when conscience whispers, "It
was for my own safety that I drew it "?
Orange. We are not ordinary men, Egmont. If it becomes us to sacrifice ourselves for
thousands, it becomes us no less to spare ourselves for thousands.
Egmont. He who spares himself becomes an object of suspicion ever to himself.
Orange. He who is sure of his own motives can, with confidence, advance or retreat.
Egmont. Your own act will render certain the evil that you dread.
Orange. Wisdom and courage alike prompt us to meet an inevitable evil.
Egmont. When the danger is imminent the faintest hope should be taken into account.
Orange We have not the smallest footing left; we are on the very brink of the
precipice.
Egmont. Is the king's favour on ground so narrow?
Orange. Not narrow, perhaps, but slippery.
Egmont. By heavens! he is belied. I cannot endure that he should be so meanly
thought of! He is Charles's son, and incapable of meanness.
Orange. Kings of course do nothing mean.
Egmont. He should be better known.
Orange. Our knowledge counsels us not to await the result of a dangerous experiment.
Egmont. No experiment is dangerous, the result of which we have the courage to
meet.
Orange. You are irritated, Egmont.
Egmont. I must see with my own eyes.
Orange. Oh that for once you saw with mine! My friend, because your eyes are open,
you imagine that you see. I go! Await Alva's arrival, and God be with you! My refusal to
do so may perhaps save you. The dragon may deem the prey not worth seizing, if he
cannot swallow us both. Perhaps he may delay, in order more surely to execute his
purpose; in the meantime you may see matters in their true light. But then, be
prompt! Lose not a moment! Save,—oh, save yourself! Farewell!—Let nothing escape
your vigilance:—how many troops he brings with him; how he garrisons the town;
what force the Regent retains; how your friends are prepared. Send me tidings—
Egmont—Egmont. What would you?
Orange (grasping his hand). Be persuaded! Go with me!
Egmont. How! Tears, Orange!
Orange. To weep for a lost friend is not unmanly.
Egmont. You deem me lost?
Orange. You are lost! Consider! Only a brief respite is left you. Farewell.
[Exit.
Egmont (alone). Strange that the thoughts of other men should exert such an influence
over us. These fears would never have entered my mind; and this man infects me with
his solicitude. Away! 'Tis a foreign drop in my blood! Kind nature, cast it forth! And to
erase the furrowed lines from my brow there yet remains indeed a friendly means.
ACT III
SCENE I.—Palace of the Regent Margaret of Parma
Regent. I might have expected it. Ha! when we live immersed in anxiety and toil, we
imagine that we achieve the utmost that is possible; while he, who, from a distance,
looks on and commands, believes that he requires only the possible. O ye kings! I had
not thought it could have galled me thus. It is so sweet to reign!—and to abdicate? I
know not how my father could do so; but I will also.
Machiavel appears in the back-ground
Regent. Approach, Machiavel. I am thinking over this letter from my brother.
Machiavel. May I know what it contains?
Regent. As much tender consideration for me as anxiety for his states. He extols the
firmness, the industry, the fidelity, with which I have hitherto watched over the
interests of his Majesty in these provinces. He condoles with me that the unbridled
people occasion me so much trouble. He is so thoroughly convinced of the depth of my
views, so extraordinarily satisfied with the prudence of my conduct, that I must almost
say the letter is too politely written for a king—certainly for a brother.
Machiavel. It is not the first time that he has testified to you his just satisfaction.
Regent. But the first time that it is a mere rhetorical figure.
Machiavel. I do not understand you.
Regent. You soon will.—For after this preamble he is of opinion that without soldiers,
without a small army indeed,—-I shall always cut a sorry figure here! We did wrong, he
says, to withdraw our troops from the provinces at the remonstrance of the
inhabitants; a garrison, he thinks, which shall press upon the neck of the burgher, will
prevent him, by its weight, from making any lofty spring.
Machiavel. It would irritate the public mind to the last degree.
Regent. The king thinks, however, do you hear?—he thinks that a clever general, one
who never listens to reason, will be able to deal promptly with all parties;—people and
nobles, citizens and peasants; he therefore sends, with a powerful army, the Duke of
Alva.
Machiavel. Alva?
Regent. You are surprised.
Machiavel. You say, he sends, he asks doubtless whether he should send.
Regent. The king asks not, he sends.
Machiavel. You will then have an experienced warrior in your service.
Regent. In my service? Speak out, Machiavel.
Machiavel. I would not anticipate you.
Regent. And I would I could dissimulate. It wounds me—wounds me to the quick. I had
rather my brother would speak his mind than attach his signature to formal epistles
drawn up by a Secretary of state.
Machiavel. Can they not comprehend?—
Regent. I know them both within and without. They would fain make a clean sweep;
and since they cannot set about it themselves, they give their confidence to any one
who comes with a besom in his hand. Oh, it seems to me as if I saw the king and his
council worked upon this tapestry.
Machiavel. So distinctly!
Regent. No feature is wanting. There are good men among them. The honest Roderigo,
so experienced and so moderate, who does not aim too high, yet lets nothing sink too
low; the upright Alonzo, the diligent Freneda, the steadfast Las Vargas, and others who
join them when the good party are in power. But there sits the hollow-eyed Toledan,
with brazen front and deep fire-glance, muttering between his teeth about womanish
softness, ill-timed concession, and that women can ride trained steeds, well enough,
but are themselves bad masters of the horse, and the like pleasantries, which, in
former times, I have been compelled to hear from political gentlemen.
Machiavel. You have chosen good colours for your picture.
Regent. Confess, Machiavel, among the tints from which I might select, there is no hue
so livid, so jaundice-like, as Alva's complexion, and the colour he is wont to paint with.
He regards every one as a blasphemer or traitor, for under this head they can all be
racked, impaled, quartered, and burnt at pleasure. The good I have accomplished here
appears as nothing seen from a distance, just because it is good. Then he dwells on
every outbreak that is past, recalls every disturbance that is quieted, and brings before
the king such a picture of mutiny, sedition, and audacity, that we appear to him to be
actually devouring one another, when with us the transient explosion of a rude people
has long been forgotten. Thus he conceives a cordial hatred for the poor people; he
views them with horror, as beasts and monsters; looks around for fire and sword, and
imagines that by such means human beings are subdued.
Machiavel. You appear to me too vehement; you take the matter too seriously. Do you
not remain Regent?
Regent. I am aware of that. He will bring his instructions. I am old enough in state
affairs to understand how people can be supplanted, without being actually deprived
of office. First, he will produce a commission, couched in terms somewhat obscure and
equivocal; he will stretch his authority, for the power is in his hands; if I complain, he
will hint at secret instructions; if I desire to see them, he will answer evasively; if I
insist, he will produce a paper of totally different import; and if this fail to satisfy me,
he will go on precisely as if I had never interfered. Meanwhile he will have
accomplished what I dread, and have frustrated my most cherished schemes.
Machiavel. I wish I could contradict you.
Regent. His harshness and cruelty will again arouse the turbulent spirit, which, with
unspeakable patience, I have succeeded in quelling; I shall see my work destroyed
before my eyes, and have besides to bear the blame of his wrongdoing.
Machiavel. Await it, your Highness.
Regent. I have sufficient self-command to remain quiet. Let him come; I will make way
for him with the best grace ere he pushes me aside.
Machiavel. So important a step thus suddenly? Regent. 'Tis harder than you imagine.
He who is accustomed to rule, to hold daily in his hand the destiny of thousands,
descends from the throne as into the grave. Better thus, however, than linger a
spectre among the living, and with hollow aspect endeavour to maintain a place which
another has inherited, and already possesses and enjoys.
SCENE II.—Clara's dwelling
Clara and her Mother
Mother. Such a love as Brackenburg's I have never seen; I thought it was to be found
only in romance books.
Clara (walking up and down the room, humming a song). With love's thrilling rapture
What joy can compare!
Mother. He suspects thy attachment to Egmont; and yet, if thou wouldst but treat him
a little kindly, I do believe he would marry thee still, if thou wouldst have him.
Clara (sings).
 Blissful
 And tearful,
 With thought-teeming brain;
 Hoping
 And fearing
 In passionate pain;
 Now shouting in triumph,
 Now sunk in despair;—
 With love's thrilling rapture
 What joy can compare!
Mother. Have done with such baby-nonsense!
Clara. Nay, do not abuse it; 'tis a song of marvellous virtue. Many a time have I lulled a
grown child to sleep with it.
Mother. Ay! Thou canst think of nothing but thy love. If it only did not put everything
else out of thy head. Thou shouldst have more regard for Brackenburg, I tell thee. He
may make thee happy yet some day.
Clara. He?
Mother. Oh, yes! A time will come! You children live only in the present, and give no
ear to our experience. Youth and happy love, all has an end; and there comes a time
when one thanks God if one has any corner to creep into.
Clara (shudders, and after a pause stands up). Mother, let that time come—like death.
To think of it beforehand is horrible! And if it come! If we must—then—we will bear
ourselves as we may. Live without thee, Egmont! (Weeping.) No! It is impossible.
[Enter Egmont (enveloped in a horseman's cloak, his hat drawn over his face).
Egmont. Clara!
Clara (utters a cry and starts back). Egmont! (She hastens towards him.) Egmont! (She
embraces and leans upon him.) O thou good, kind, sweet Egmont! Art thou come? Art
thou here indeed!
Egmont. Good evening, Mother?
Mother. God save you, noble sir! My daughter has well-nigh pined to death, because
you have stayed away so long; she talks and sings about you the live-long day.
Egmont. You will give me some supper?
Mother. You do us too much honour. If we only had anything—
Clara. Certainly! Be quiet, Mother; I have provided everything; there is something
prepared. Do not betray me, Mother.
Mother. There's little enough.
Clara. Never mind! And then I think when he is with me I am never hungry; so he
cannot, I should think, have any great appetite when I am with him.
Egmont. Do you think so? (Clara stamps with her foot and turns pettishly away.) What
ails you?
Clara. How cold you are to-day! You have not yet offered me a kiss. Why do you keep
your arms enveloped in your mantle, like a new-born babe? It becomes neither a
soldier nor a lover to keep his arms muffled up.
Egmont. Sometimes, dearest, sometimes. When the soldier stands in ambush and
would delude the foe, he collects his thoughts, gathers his mantle around him, and
matures his plan and a lover—
Mother. Will you not take a seat, and make yourself comfortable? I must to the
kitchen, Clara thinks of nothing when you are here. You must put up with what we
have.
Egmont. Your good-will is the best seasoning.
[Exit Mother.
Clara. And what then is my love?
Egmont. Just what thou wilt.
Clara. Liken it to anything, if you have the heart.
Egmont. But first. (He flings aside his mantle, and appears arrayed in a magnificent
dress.)
Clara. Oh heavens!
Egmont. Now my arms are free! (Embraces her.)
Clara. Don't! You will spoil your dress. (She steps back.) How magnificent! I dare not
touch you.
Egmont. Art thou satisfied? I promised to come once arrayed in Spanish fashion.
Clara. I had ceased to remind you of it; I thought you did not like it—ah, and the
Golden Fleece!
Egmont. Thou seest it now.
Clara. And did the emperor really hang it round thy neck!
Egmont. He did, my child! And this chain and Order invest the wearer with the noblest
privileges. On earth I acknowledge no judge over my actions, except the grand master
of the Order, with the assembled chapter of knights.
Clara. Oh, thou mightest let the whole world sit in judgment over thee. The velvet is
too splendid! and the braiding! and the embroidery! One knows not where to begin.
Egmont. There, look thy fill.
Clara. And the Golden Fleece! You told me its history, and said it is the symbol of
everything great and precious, of everything that can be merited and won by diligence
and toil. It is very precious—I may liken it to thy love;—even so I wear it next my
heart;—and then—
Egmont. What wilt thou say?
Clara. And then again it is not like.
Egmont. How so?
Clara. I have not won it by diligence and toil, I have not deserved it.
Egmont. It is otherwise in love. Thou dost deserve it because thou hast not sought it—
and, for the most part, those only obtain love who seek it not.
Clara. Is it from thine own experience that thou hast learned this? Didst thou make
that proud remark in reference to thyself? Thou, whom all the people love?
Egmont. Would that I had done something for them! That I could do anything for
them! It is their own good pleasure to love me.
Clara. Thou hast doubtless been with the Regent to-day?
Egmont. I have.
Clara. Art thou upon good terms with her?
Egmont So it would appear. We are kind and serviceable to each other.
Clara. And in thy heart?
Egmont. I like her. True, we have each our own views; but that is nothing to the
purpose. She is an excellent woman, knows with whom she has to deal, and would be
penetrating enough were she not quite so suspicious. I give her plenty of employment,
because she is always suspecting some secret motive in my conduct when, in fact, I
have none.
Clara. Really none?
Egmont. Well, with one little exception, perhaps. All wine deposits lees in the cask in
the course of time. Orange furnishes her still better entertainment, and is a perpetual
riddle. He has got the credit of harbouring some secret design; and she studies his
brow to discover his thoughts, and his steps, to learn in what direction they are bent.
Clara. Does she dissemble?
Egmont. She is Regent—and do you ask?
Clara. Pardon me; I meant to say, is she false?
Egmont. Neither more nor less than everyone who has his own objects to attain.
Clara. I should never feel at home in the world. But she has a masculine spirit, and is
another sort of woman from us housewives and sempstresses. She is great, steadfast,
resolute.
Egmont. Yes, when matters are not too much involved. For once, however, she is a
little disconcerted.
Clara. How so?
Egmont. She has a moustache, too, on her upper lip, and occasionally an attack of the
gout. A regular Amazon.
Clara. A majestic woman! I should dread to appear before her.
Egmont. Yet thou art not wont to be timid! It would not be fear, only maidenly
bashfulness.
(Clara casts down her eyes, takes his hand, and leans upon him.)
Egmont. I understand thee, dearest! Thou mayst raise thine eyes. (He kisses her eyes.)
Clara. Let me be silent! Let me embrace thee! Let me look into thine eyes, and find
there everything—hope and comfort, joy and sorrow! (She embraces and gazes on
him.) Tell me! Oh, tell me! It seems so strange—art thou indeed Egmont! Count
Egmont! The great Egmont, who makes so much noise in the world, who figures in the
newspapers, who is the support and stay of the provinces?
Egmont. No, Clara, I am not he.
Clara. How?
Egmont. Seest thou, Clara? Let me sit down! (He seats himself, she kneels on a
footstool before him, rests her arms on his knees and looks up in his face.) That
Egmont is a morose, cold, unbending Egmont, obliged to be upon his guard, to assume
now this appearance and now that; harassed, misapprehended and perplexed, when
the crowd esteem him light-hearted and gay; beloved by a people who do not know
their own minds; honoured and extolled by the intractable multitude; surrounded by
friends in whom he dares not confide; observed by men who are on the watch to
supplant him; toiling and striving, often without an object, generally without a reward.
O let me conceal how it fares with him, let me not speak of his feelings! But this
Egmont, Clara, is calm, unreserved, happy, beloved and known by the best of hearts,
which is also thoroughly known to him, and which he presses to his own with
unbounded confidence and love. (He embraces her.) This is thy Egmont.
Clara. So let me die! The world has no joy after this!
ACT IV
SCENE I.—A Street
Jetter, Carpenter
Jetter. Hist! neighbour,—a word!
Carpenter. Go your way and be quiet.
Jetter. Only one word. Is there nothing new?
Carpenter. Nothing, except that we are anew forbidden to speak.
Jetter. How?
Carpenter. Step here, close to this house. Take heed! Immediately on his arrival, the
Duke of Alva published a decree, by which two or three, found conversing together in
the streets, are without trial, declared guilty of high treason.
Jetter. Alas!
Carpenter. To speak of state affairs is prohibited on pain of perpetual imprisonment.
Jetter. Alas for our liberty!
Carpenter. And no one, on pain of death, shall censure the measures of government.
Jetter. Alas, for our heads!
Carpenter. And fathers, Mothers, children, kindred, friends, and servants, are invited,
by the promise of large rewards, to disclose what passes in the privacy of our homes,
before an expressly appointed tribunal.
Jetter. Let us go home.
Carpenter. And the obedient are promised that they shall suffer no injury, either in
person or estate.
Jetter. How gracious!—-I felt ill at ease the moment the duke entered the town. Since
then, it has seemed to me, as though the heavens were covered with black crape,
which hangs so low, that one must stoop down to avoid knocking one's head against it.
Carpenter. And how do you like his soldiers? They are a different sort of crabs from
those we have been used to.
Jetter. Faugh! It gives one the cramp at one's heart to see such a troop march down
the street. As straight as tapers, with fixed look, only one step, however many there
may be; and when they stand sentinel, and you pass one of them, it seems as though
he would look you through and through; and he looks so stiff and morose, that you
fancy you see a task-master at every corner. They offend my sight. Our militia were
merry fellows; they took liberties, stood their legs astride, their hats over their ears,
they lived and let live; these fellows are like machines with a devil inside them.
Carpenter. Were such an one to cry, "Halt!" and level his musket, think you one would
stand?
Jetter. I should fall dead upon the spot.
Carpenter. Let us go home!
Jetter No good can come of it. Farewell.
[Enter Soest.
Soest. Friends! Neighbours! Carpenter. Hush! Let us go.
Soest. Have you heard?
Jetter. Only too much!
Soest. The Regent is gone.
Jetter. Then Heaven help us.
Carpenter. She was some stay to us.
Soest. Her departure was sudden and secret. She could not agree with the duke; she
has sent word to the nobles that she intends to return. No one believes it, however.
Carpenter. God pardon the nobles for letting this new yoke be laid upon our necks.
They might have prevented it. Our privileges are gone.
Jetter. For Heaven's sake not a word about privileges. I already scent an execution; the
sun will not come forth; the fogs are rank.
Soest. Orange, too, is gone.
Carpenter. Then are we quite deserted!
Soest, Count Egmont is still here.
Jetter. God be thanked! Strengthen him, all ye saints, to do his utmost; he is the only
one who can help us.
[Enter Vansen.
Vansen. Have I at length found a few brave citizens who have not crept out of sight?
Jetter. Do us the favour to pass on.
Vansen. You are not civil.
Jetter. This is no time for compliments. Does your back itch again? are your wounds
already healed?
Vansen. Ask a soldier about his wounds? Had I cared for blows, nothing good would
have come of me.
Jetter. Matters may grow more serious.
Vansen. You feel from the gathering storm a pitiful weakness in your limbs, it seems.
Carpenter. Your limbs will soon be in motion elsewhere, if you do not keep quiet.
Vansen. Poor mice! The master of the house procures a new cat, and ye are straight in
despair! The difference is very trifling; we shall get on as we did before, only be quiet.
Carpenter. You are an insolent knave.
Vansen. Gossip! Let the duke alone. The old cat looks as though he had swallowed
devils, instead of mice, and could not now digest them. Let him alone, I say; he must
eat, drink, and sleep, like other men. I am not afraid if we only watch our opportunity,
At first he makes quick work Of it; by-and-by, however, he too will find that it is
pleasanter to live in the larder, among flitches of bacon, and to rest by night, than to
entrap a few solitary mice in the granary. Go to! I know the stadtholders.
Carpenter. What such a fellow can say with impunity! Had I said such a thing, I should
not hold myself safe a moment.
Vansen. Do not make yourselves uneasy! God in heaven does not trouble himself
about you, poor worms, much less the Regent.
Jetter. Slanderer!
Vansen. I know some for whom it would be better if, instead of their own high spirits,
they had a little tailor's blood in their veins.
Carpenter. What mean you by that?
Vansen. Hum! I mean the count.
Jetter. Egmont! What has he to fear?
Vansen. I'm a poor devil, and could live a whole year round on what he loses in a single
night; yet he would do well to give me his revenue for a twelvemonth, to have my
head upon his shoulders for one quarter of an hour.
Jetter. You think yourself very clever; yet there is more sense in the hairs of Egmont's
head, than in your brains.
Vansen. Perhaps so! Not more shrewdness, however. These gentry are the most apt to
deceive themselves. He should be more chary of his confidence.
Jetter. How his tongue wags! Such a gentleman!
Vansen. Just because he is not a tailor.
Jetter. You audacious scoundrel!
Vansen. I only wish he had your courage in his limbs for an hour to make him uneasy,
and plague and torment him, till he were compelled to leave the town.
Jetter. What nonsense you talk; why he's as safe as a star in heaven.
Vansen. Have you ever seen one snuff itself out? Off it went!
Carpenter. Who would dare to meddle with him?
Vansen. Will you interfere to prevent it? Will you stir up an insurrection if he is
arrested?
Jetter. Ah!
Vansen. Will you risk your ribs for his sake?
Soest. Eh!
Vansen (mimicking them). Eh! Oh! Ah! Run through the alphabet in your wonderment.
So it is, and so it will remain. Heaven help him!
Jetter. Confound your impudence. Can such a noble, upright man have anything to
fear?
Vansen. In this world the rogue has everywhere the advantage. At the bar, he makes a
fool of the judge; on the bench, he takes pleasure in convicting the accused. I have had
to copy out a protocol, where the commissary was handsomely rewarded by the court,
both with praise and money, because through his cross-examination, an honest devil,
against whom they had a grudge, was made out to be a rogue.
Carpenter. Why, that again is a downright lie. What can they want to get out of a man
if he is innocent?
Vansen. Oh, you blockhead! When nothing can be worked out of a man by crossexamination, they work it into him. Honesty is rash and withal somewhat
presumptuous; at first they question quietly enough, and the prisoner, proud of his
innocence, as they call it, comes out with much that a sensible man would keep back!
then, from these answers the inquisitor proceeds to put new questions, and is on the
watch for the slightest contradiction; there he fastens his line; and, let the poor devil
lose his self-possession, say too much here, or too little there, or, Heaven knows from
what whim or other, let him withhold some trifling circumstance, or at any moment
give way to fear—then we're on the right track, and, I assure you, no beggar-woman
seeks for rags among the rubbish with more care than such a fabricator of rogues,
from trifling, crooked, disjointed, misplaced, misprinted, and concealed facts and
information, acknowledged or denied, endeavours at length to patch up a scarecrow,
by means of which he may at least hang his victim in effigy; and the poor devil may
thank Heaven if he is in a condition to see himself hanged.
Jetter. He has a ready tongue of his own.
Carpenter. This may serve well enough with flies. Wasps laugh at your cunning web.
Vansen. According to the kind of spider. The tall duke, now, has just the look of your
garden spider; not the large-bellied kind, they are less dangerous; but your longfooted, meagre-bodied gentleman, that does not fatten on his diet, and whose threads
are slender indeed, but not the less tenacious.
Jetter. Egmont is knight of the Golden Fleece, who dare lay hands on him? He can be
tried only by his peers, by the assembled knights of his order. Your own foul tongue
and evil conscience betray you into this nonsense.
Vansen. Think you that I wish him ill? I would you were in the right. He is an excellent
gentleman. He once let off, with a sound drubbing, some good friends of mine, who
would else have been hanged. Now take yourselves off! begone, I advise you! Yonder I
see the patrol again commencing their round. They do not look as if they would be
willing to fraternize with us over a glass. We must wait, and bide our time. I have a
couple of nieces and a gossip of a tapster; if after enjoying themselves in their
company, they are not tamed, they are regular wolves.
SCENE II.—The Palace of Eulenberg, Residence of the Duke of Alva
Silva and Gomez (meeting)
Silva. Have you executed the duke's commands?
Gomez. Punctually. All the day-patrols have received orders to assemble at the
appointed time, at the various points that I have indicated. Meanwhile, they march as
usual through the town to maintain order. Each is ignorant respecting the movements
of the rest, and imagines the command to have reference to himself alone; thus in a
moment the cordon can be formed, and all the avenues to the palace occupied. Know
you the reason of this command?
Silva. I am accustomed blindly to obey; and to whom can one more easily render
obedience than to the duke, since the event always proves the wisdom of his
commands?
Gomez. Well! Well! I am not surprised that you are become as reserved and
monosyllabic as the duke, since you are obliged to be always about his person; to me,
however, who am accustomed to the lighter service of Italy, it seems strange enough.
In loyalty and obedience, I am the same old soldier as ever; but I am wont to indulge in
gossip and discussion; here, you are all silent, and seem as though you knew not how
to enjoy yourselves. The duke, methinks, is like a brazen tower without gates, the
garrison of which must be furnished with wings. Not long ago I heard him say at the
table of a gay, jovial fellow that he was like a bad spirit-shop, with a brandy sign
displayed; to allure idlers, vagabonds, and thieves.
Silva. And has he not brought us hither in silence?
Gomez. Nothing can be said against that. Of a truth, we, who witnessed the address
with which he led the troops hither out of Italy, have seen something. How he
advanced warily through friends and foes; through the French, both royalists and
heretics; through the Swiss and their confederates; maintained the strictest discipline,
and accomplished with ease, and without the slightest hindrance, a march that was
esteemed so perilous!—We have seen and learned something.
Silva. Here too! Is not everything as still and quiet as though there had been no
disturbance?
Gomez. Why, as for that, it was tolerably quiet when we arrived.
Silva. The provinces have become much more tranquil; if there is any movement now,
it is only among those who wish to escape; and to them, methinks, the duke will
speedily close every outlet.
Gomez. This service cannot fail to win for him the favour of the king.
Silva. And nothing is more expedient for us than to retain his. Should the king come
hither, the duke doubtless and all whom he recommends will not go without their
reward.
Gomez. Do you really believe then that the king will come?
Silva. So many preparations are being made, that the report appears highly probable.
Gomez. I am not convinced, however.
Silva. Keep your thoughts to yourself then. For if it should not be the king's intention to
come, it is at least, certain that he wishes the rumour to be believed.
[Enter Ferdinand.
Ferdinand. Is my father not yet abroad?
Silva. We are waiting to receive his commands.
Ferdinand. The princes will soon be here.
Gomez. Are they expected to-day?
Ferdinand. Orange and Egmont.
Gomez (aside to Silva). A light breaks in upon me.
Silva. Well, then, say nothing about it.
Enter the Duke of Alva (as he advances the rest draw back)
Alva. Gomez.
Gomez (steps forward). My lord.
Alva. You have distributed the guards and given them their instructions?
Gomez. Most accurately. The day-patrols—
Alva. Enough. Attend in the gallery. Silva will announce to you the moment when you
are to draw them together, and to occupy the avenues leading to the palace. The rest
you know.
Gomez. I do, my lord.
[Exit. Alva. Silva.
Silva. Here my lord.
Alva. I shall require you to manifest to-day all the qualities which I have hitherto prized
in you: courage, resolve, unswerving execution.
Silva. I thank you for affording me an opportunity of showing that your old servant is
unchanged.
Alva. The moment the princes enter my cabinet, hasten to arrest Egmont's private
Secretary. You have made all needful preparations for securing the others who are
specified?
Silva. Rely upon us. Their doom, like a well-calculated eclipse, will overtake them with
terrible certainty.
Alva. Have you had them all narrowly watched?
Silva. All. Egmont especially. He is the only one whose demeanour, since your arrival,
remains unchanged. The live-long day he is now on one horse and now on another; he
invites guests as usual, is merry and entertaining at table, plays at dice, shoots, and at
night steals to his mistress. The others, on the contrary, have made a manifest pause in
their mode of life; they remain at home, and, from the outward aspect of their houses,
you would imagine that there was a sick man within.
Alva. To work then, ere they recover in spite of us.
Silva. I shall bring them without fail. In obedience to your commands we load them
with officious honours; they are alarmed; cautiously, yet anxiously, they tender us
their thanks, feel that flight would be the most prudent course, yet none venture to
adopt it; they hesitate, are unable to work together, while the bond which unites them
prevents their acting boldly as individuals. They are anxious to withdraw themselves
from suspicion, and thus only render themselves more obnoxious to it. I already
contemplate with joy the successful realization of your scheme.
Alva. I rejoice only over what is accomplished, and not lightly over that; for there ever
remains ground for serious and anxious thought. Fortune is capricious; the common,
the worthless, she oft-times ennobles, while she dishonours with a contemptible issue
the most maturely considered schemes. Await the arrival of the princes, then order
Gomez to occupy the streets, and hasten yourself to arrest Egmont's secretary, and the
others who are specified. This done, return, and announce to my son that he may bring
me the tidings in the council.
Silva. I trust this evening I shall dare to appear in your presence. (Alva approaches his
son who has hitherto been standing in the gallery.) I dare not whisper it even to
myself; but my mind misgives me. The event will, I fear, be different from what he
anticipates. I see before me spirits, who, still and thoughtful, weigh in ebon scales the
doom of princes and of many thousands. Slowly the beam moves up and down; deeply
the judges appear to ponder; at length one scale sinks, the other rises, breathed on by
the caprice of destiny, and all is decided.
[Exit.
Alva (advancing with his son). How did you find the town?
Ferdinand. All is again quiet. I rode as for pastime, from street to street. Your welldistributed patrols hold Fear so tightly yoked, that she does not venture even to
whisper. The town resembles a plain when the lightning's glare announces the
impending storm: no bird, no beast is to be seen, that is not stealing to a place of
shelter.
Alva. Has nothing further occurred?
Ferdinand. Egmont, with a few companions, rode into the market-place; we exchanged
greetings; he was mounted on an unbroken charger, which excited my admiration, "Let
us hasten to break in our steeds," he exclaimed; "we shall need them ere long!" He
said that he should see me again to-day; he is coming here, at your desire, to
deliberate with you.
Alva. He will see you again.
Ferdinand. Among all the knights whom I know here, he pleases me the best. I think
we shall be friends.
Alva. You are always rash and inconsiderate. I recognize in you the levity of your
Mother, which threw her unconditionally into my arms. Appearances have already
allured you precipitately into many dangerous connections.
Ferdinand. You will find me ever submissive.
Alva. I pardon this inconsiderate kindness, this heedless gaiety, in consideration of
your youthful blood. Only forget not on what mission I am sent, and what part in it I
would assign to you.
Ferdinand. Admonish me, and spare me not, when you deem it needful.
Alva (after a pause). My son!
Ferdinand. My father!
Alva. The princes will be here anon; Orange and Egmont. It is not mistrust that has
withheld me till now from disclosing to you what is about to take place. They will not
depart hence.
Ferdinand. What do you purpose?
Alva. It has been resolved to arrest them.—You are astonished! Learn what you have
to do; the reasons you shall know when all is accomplished. Time fails now to unfold
them. With you alone I wish to deliberate on the weightiest, the most secret matters; a
powerful bond holds us linked together; you are dear and precious to me; on you I
would bestow everything. Not the habit of obedience alone would I impress upon you;
I desire also to implant within your mind the power to realize, to command, to
execute; to you I would bequeath a vast inheritance, to the king a most useful servant;
I would endow you with the noblest of my possessions, that you may not be ashamed
to appear among your brethren.
Ferdinand. How deeply am I indebted to you for this love, which you manifest for me
alone, while a whole kingdom trembles before you!
Alva. Now hear what is to be done. As soon as the princes have entered, every avenue
to the palace will be guarded. This duty is confided to Gomez. Silva will hasten to arrest
Egmont's secretary, together with those whom we hold most in suspicion. You,
meanwhile, will take the command of the guards stationed at the gates and in the
courts. Before all, take care to occupy the adjoining apartment with the trustiest
soldiers. Wait in the gallery till Silva returns, then bring me any unimportant paper, as
a signal that his commission is executed. Remain in the ante-chamber till Orange
retires, follow him; I will detain Egmont here as though I had some further
communication to make to him. At the end of the gallery demand Orange's sword,
summon the guards, secure promptly the most dangerous man; I meanwhile will seize
Egmont here.
Ferdinand. I obey, my father—for the first time with a heavy and an anxious heart.
Alva. I pardon you; this is the first great day of your life.
[Enter Silva.
Silva. A courier from Antwerp. Here is Orange's letter. He does not come.
Alva. Says the messenger so?
Silva. No, my own heart tells me.
Alva. In thee speaks my evil genius. (After reading the letter, he makes a sign to the
two, and they retire to the gallery. Alva remains alone in front of the stage.) He comes
not! Till the last moment he delays declaring himself. He ventures not to come! So
then, the cautious man, contrary to all expectations, is for once cautious enough to lay
aside his wonted caution. The hour moves on! Let the finger travel but a short space
over the dial, and a great work is done or lost—irrevocably lost; for the opportunity
can never be retrieved, nor can our intention remain concealed. Long had I maturely
weighed everything, foreseen even this contingency, and firmly resolved in my own
mind what, in that case, was to be done; and now, when I am called upon to act, I can
with difficulty guard my mind from being again distracted by conflicting doubts. Is it
expedient to seize the others if he escape me? Shall I delay, and suffer Egmont to
elude my grasp, together with his friends, and so many others who now, and perhaps
for to-day only, are in my hands? How! Does destiny control even thee—the
uncontrollable? How long matured! How well prepared! How great, how admirable the
plan! How nearly had hope attained the goal! And now, at the decisive moment, thou
art placed between two evils; as in a lottery, thou dost grasp in the dark future; what
thou hast drawn remains still unrolled, to thee unknown whether it is a prize or a
blank! (He becomes attentive, like one who hears a noise, and steps to the window.)
'Tis he! Egmont! Did thy steed bear thee hither so lightly, and started not at the scent
of blood, at the spirit with the naked sword who received thee at the gate? Dismount!
Lo, now thou hast one foot in the grave! And now both! Ay, caress him, and for the last
time stroke his neck for the gallant service he has rendered thee. And for me no choice
is left. The delusion, in which Egmont ventures here to-day, cannot a second time
deliver him into my hands! Hark! (Ferdinand and Silva enter hastily.) Obey my orders! I
swerve not from my purpose. I shall detain Egmont here as best I may, till you bring
me tidings from Silva. Then remain at hand. Thee, too, fate has robbed of the proud
honour of arresting with thine own hand the king's greatest enemy. (To Silva.) Be
prompt! (To Ferdinand.) Advance to meet him.
(Alva remains some moments alone, pacing the chamber in silence.)
[Enter Egmont.
Egmont. I come to learn the king's commands; to hear what service he demands from
our loyalty, which remains eternally devoted to him.
Alva. He desires, before all, to hear your counsel.
Egmont. Upon what subject? Does Orange come also? I thought to find him here.
Alva. I regret that he fails us at this important crisis. The king desires your counsel, your
opinion as to the best means of tranquillizing these states. He trusts indeed that you
will zealously co-operate with him in quelling these disturbances, and in securing to
these provinces the benefit of complete and permanent order.
Egmont. You, my lord, should know better than I, that tranquillity is already sufficiently
restored, and was still more so, till the appearance of fresh troops again agitated the
public mind, and filled it anew with anxiety and alarm.
Alva. You seem to intimate that it would have been more advisable if the king had not
placed me in a position to interrogate you.
Egmont. Pardon me! It is not for me to determine whether the king acted advisedly in
sending the army hither, whether the might of his royal presence alone would not
have operated more powerfully. The army is here, the king is not. But we should be
most ungrateful were we to forget what we owe to the Regent. Let it be
acknowledged! By her prudence and valour, by her judicious use of authority and
force, of persuasion and finesse, she pacified the insurgents, and, to the astonishment
of the world, succeeded, in the course of a few months, in bringing a rebellious people
back to their duty.
Alva. I deny it not. The insurrection is quelled; and the people appear to be already
forced back within the bounds of obedience. But does it not depend upon their caprice
alone to overstep these bounds? Who shall prevent them from again breaking loose?
Where is the power capable of restraining them? Who will be answerable to us for
their future loyalty and submission? Their own goodwill is the sole pledge we have.
Egmont. And is not the good-will of a people the surest, the noblest pledge? By
heaven! when can a monarch hold himself more secure, ay, both against foreign and
domestic foes, than when all can stand for one, and one for all?
Alva. You would not have us believe, however, that such is the case here at present?
Egmont. Let the king proclaim a general pardon; he will thus tranquillize the public
mind; and it will be seen how speedily loyalty and affection will return, when
confidence is restored.
Alva. How! And suffer those who have insulted the majesty of the king, who have
violated the sanctuaries of our religion, to go abroad unchallenged! living witnesses
that enormous crimes may be perpetrated with impunity!
Egmont. And ought not a crime of frenzy, of intoxication, to be excused, rather than
horribly chastised? Especially when there is the sure hope, nay, more, where there is
positive certainty that the evil will never again recur? Would not sovereigns thus be
more secure? Are not those monarchs most extolled by the world and by posterity,
who can pardon, pity, despise an offence against their dignity? Are they not on that
account likened to God himself, who is far too exalted to be assailed by every idle
blasphemy?
Alva. And therefore, should the king contend for the honour of God and of religion, we
for the authority of the king. What the supreme power disdains to avert, it is our duty
to avenge. Were I to counsel, no guilty person should live to rejoice in his impunity.
Egmont. Think you that you will be able to reach them all? Do we not daily hear that
fear is driving them to and fro, and forcing them out of the land? The more wealthy
will escape to other countries with their property, their children, and their friends;
while the poor will carry their industrious hands to our neighbours.
Alva. They will, if they cannot be prevented. It is on this account that the king desires
counsel and aid from every prince, zealous co-operation from every stadtholder; not
merely a description of the present posture of affairs, or conjectures as to what might
take place were events suffered to hold on their course without interruption. To
contemplate a mighty evil, to flatter oneself with hope, to trust to time, to strike a
blow, like the clown in a play, so as to make a noise and appear to do something, when
in fact one would fain do nothing; is not such conduct calculated to awaken a suspicion
that those who act thus contemplate with satisfaction a rebellion, which they would
not indeed excite, but which they are by no means unwilling to encourage?
Egmont (about to break forth, restrains himself, and after a brief pause, speaks with
composure). Not every design is obvious, and many a man's design is misconstrued. It
is widely rumoured, however, that the object which the king has in view is not so much
to govern the provinces according to uniform and dearly defined laws, to maintain the
majesty of religion, and to give his people universal peace, as unconditionally to
subjugate them, to rob them of their ancient rights, to appropriate their possessions,
to curtail the fair privileges of the nobles, for whose sake alone they are ready to serve
him with life and limb. Religion, it is said, is merely a splendid device, behind which
every dangerous design may be contrived with the greater ease; the prostrate crowds
adore the sacred symbols pictured there, while behind lurks the fowler ready to
ensnare them.
Alva. This must I hear from you?
Egmont. I speak not my own sentiments! I but repeat what is loudly rumoured, and
uttered now here and now there by great and by humble, by wise men and fools. The
Netherlanders fear a double yoke, and who will be surety to them for their liberty?
Alva. Liberty! A fair word when rightly understood. What liberty would they have?
What is the freedom of the most free? To do right! And in that the monarch will not
hinder them. No! No! They imagine themselves enslaved, when they have not the
power to injure themselves and others. Would it not be better to abdicate at once,
rather than rule such a people? When the country is threatened by foreign invaders,
the burghers, occupied only with their immediate interests, bestow no thought upon
the advancing foe, and when the king requires their aid, they quarrel among
themselves, and thus, as it were, conspire with the enemy. Far better is it to
circumscribe their power, to control and guide them for their good, as children are
controlled and guided. Trust me, a people grows neither old nor wise, a people
remains always in its infancy.
Egmont. How rarely does a king attain wisdom! And is it not fit that the many should
confide their interests to the many rather than to the one? And not even to the one,
but to the few servants of the one, men who have grown old under the eyes of their
master. To grow wise, it seems, is the exclusive privilege of these favoured individuals.
Alva. Perhaps for the very reason that they are not left to themselves.
Egmont. And therefore they would fain leave no one else to his own guidance. Let
them do what they like, however; I have replied to your questions, and I repeat, the
measures you propose will never succeed! They cannot succeed! I know my
countrymen. They are men worthy to tread God's earth; each complete in himself, a
little king, steadfast, active, capable, loyal, attached to ancient customs. It may be
difficult to win their confidence, but it is easy to retain it. Firm and unbending! They
may be crushed, but not subdued.
Alva (who during this speech has looked round several times). Would you venture to
repeat what you have uttered, in the king's presence?
Egmont. It were the worse, if in his presence I were restrained by fear! The better for
him and for his people, if he inspired me with confidence, if he encouraged me to give
yet freer utterance to my thoughts.
Alva. What is profitable, I can listen to as well as he.
Egmont. I would say to him—'Tis easy for the shepherd to drive before him a flock of
sheep; the ox draws the plough without opposition; but if you would ride the noble
steed, you must study his thoughts, you must require nothing unreasonable, nor
unreasonably, from him. The burgher desires to retain his ancient constitution; to be
governed by his own countrymen; and why? Because he knows in that case how he
shall be ruled, because he can rely upon their disinterestedness, upon their sympathy
with his fate.
Alva. And ought not the Regent to be empowered to alter these ancient usages?
Should not this constitute his fairest privilege? What is permanent in this world? And
shall the constitution of a state alone remain unchanged? Must not every relation alter
in the course of time, and on that very account, an ancient constitution become the
source of a thousand evils, because not adapted to the present condition of the
people? These ancient rights afford, doubtless, convenient loopholes, through which
the crafty and the powerful may creep, and wherein they may lie concealed, to the
injury of the people and of the entire community; and it is on this account, I fear, that
they are held in such high esteem.
Egmont. And these arbitrary changes, these unlimited encroachments of the supreme
power, are they not indications that one will permit himself to do what is forbidden to
thousands? The monarch would alone be free, that he may have it in his power to
gratify his every wish, to realize his every thought. And though we should confide in
him as a good and virtuous sovereign, will he be answerable to us for his successor?
That none who come after him shall rule without consideration, without forbearance!
And who would deliver us from absolute caprice, should he send hither his servants,
his minions, who, without knowledge of the country and its requirements, should
govern according to their own good pleasure, meet with no opposition, and know
themselves exempt from all responsibility?
Alva (who has meanwhile again looked round). There is nothing more natural than that
a king should choose to retain the power in his own hands, and that he should select as
the instruments of his authority, those who best understand him, who desire to
understand him, and who will unconditionally execute his will.
Egmont. And just as natural is it, that the burgher should prefer being governed by one
born and reared in the same land, whose notions of right and wrong are in harmony
with his own, and whom he can regard as his brother.
Alva. And yet the noble, methinks, has shared rather unequally with these brethren of
his.
Egmont. That took place centuries ago, and is now submitted to without envy. But
should new men, whose presence is not needed in the country, be sent, to enrich
themselves a second time, at the cost of the nation; should the people see themselves
exposed to their bold, unscrupulous rapacity, it would excite a ferment that would not
soon be quelled.
Alva. You utter words to which I ought not to listen;—I, too, am a foreigner.
Egmont. That they are spoken in your presence is a sufficient proof that they have no
reference to you.
Alva. Be that as it may, I would rather not hear them from you. The king sent me here
in the hope that I should obtain the support of the nobles. The king wills, and will have
his will obeyed. After profound deliberation, the king at length discerns what course
will best promote the welfare of the people; matters cannot be permitted to go on as
heretofore; it is the king's intention to limit their power for their own good; if
necessary, to force upon them their salvation: to sacrifice the more dangerous
burghers in order that the rest may find repose, and enjoy in peace the blessing of a
wise government, This is his resolve; this I am commissioned to announce to the
nobles; and in his name I require from them advice, not as to the course to be
pursued—on that he is resolved—but as to the best means of carrying his purpose into
effect.
Egmont. Your words, alas, justify the fears of the people, the universal fear! The king
has then resolved as no sovereign ought to resolve. In order to govern his subjects
more easily, he would crush, subvert, nay, ruthlessly destroy, their strength, their
spirit, and their self-respect! He would violate the inmost core of their individuality,
doubtless with the view of promoting their happiness. He would annihilate them, that
they may assume a new, a different form. Oh! if his purpose be good, he is fatally
misguided! It is not the king whom we resist;—we but place ourselves in the way of
the monarch, who, unhappily, is about to take the first rash step in a wrong direction.
Alva. Such being your sentiments, it were a vain attempt for us to endeavour to agree.
You must indeed think poorly of the king, and contemptibly of his counsellors, if you
imagine that everything has not already been thought of and maturely weighed. I have
no commission a second time to balance conflicting arguments. From the people I
demand submission;—and from you, their leaders and princes, I demand counsel and
support, as pledges of this unconditional duty.
Egmont. Demand our heads, and your object Is attained; to a noble soul it must be
indifferent whether he stoop his neck to such a yoke, or lay it upon the block. I have
spoken much to little purpose. I have agitated the air, but accomplished nothing.
[Enter Ferdinand.
Ferdinand. Pardon my intrusion. Here is a letter, the bearer of which urgently demands
an answer.
Alva. Allow me to peruse its contents. (Steps aside.)
Ferdinand (to Egmont). 'Tis a noble steed that your people have brought, to carry you
away.
Egmont. I have seen worse. I have had him some time; I think of parting with him. If he
pleases you we shall probably soon agree as to the price.
Ferdinand. We will think about it.
(Alva motions to his son, who retires to the back-ground.)
Egmont. Farewell! Allow me to retire; for, by heaven, I know not what more I can say.
Alva. Fortunately for you, chance prevents you from making a fuller disclosure of your
sentiments. You incautiously lay bare the recesses of your heart, and your own lips
furnish evidence against you, more fatal than could be produced by your bitterest
adversary.
Egmont. This reproach disturbs me not. I know my own heart; I know with what honest
zeal I am devoted to the king; I know that my allegiance is more true than that of many
who, in his service, seek only to serve themselves. I regret that our discussion should
terminate so unsatisfactorily, and trust that in spite of our opposing views, the service
of the king, our master, and the welfare of our country, may speedily unite us; another
conference, the presence of the princes who to-day are absent, may, perchance, in a
more propitious moment, accomplish what at present appears impossible. In this hope
I take my leave.
Alva (who at the same time makes a sign to Ferdinand). Hold, Egmont!—Your sword!-
(The centre door opens and discloses the gallery, which is occupied with guards, who
remain motionless.)
Egmont (after a pause of astonishment). This was the intention? For this thou hast
summoned me? (Grasping his sword as if to defend himself.) Am I then weaponless?
Alva. The king commands. Thou art my prisoner. (At the same time guards enter from
both sides.)
Egmont (after a pause). The king?—Orange! Orange! (after a pause, resigning his
sword). Take it! It has been employed far oftener in defending the cause of my king
than in protecting this breast.
(He retires by the centre door, followed by the guard and Alva's son. Alva remains
standing while the curtain falls.)
ACT V
SCENE I.—A Street. Twilight
Clara, Brackenburg, Burghers
Brackenburg. Dearest, for Heaven's sake, what wouldst thou do?
Clara. Come with me, Brackenburg! Thou canst not know the people, we are certain to
rescue him; for what can equal their love for him? Each feels, I could swear it, the
burning desire to deliver him, to avert danger from a life so precious, and to restore
freedom to the most free. Come! A voice only is wanting to call them together. In their
souls the memory is still fresh of all they owe him, and well they know that his mighty
arm alone shields them from destruction. For his sake, for their own sake, they must
peril everything. And what do we peril? At most, our lives, which if he perish, are not
worth preserving.
Brackenburg. Unhappy girl! Thou seest not the power that holds us fettered as with
bands of iron.
Clara. To me it does not appear invincible. Let us not lose time in idle words. Here
comes some of our old, honest, valiant burghers! Hark ye, friends! Neighbours!
Hark!—Say, how fares it with Egmont?
Carpenter. What does the girl want? Tell her to hold her peace.
Clara. Step nearer, that we may speak low, till we are united and more strong. Not a
moment is to be lost! Audacious tyranny, that dared to fetter him, already lifts the
dagger against his life. Oh, my friends! With the advancing twilight my anxiety grows
more intense. I dread this night. Come! Let us disperse; let us hasten from quarter to
quarter, and call out the burghers. Let every one grasp his ancient weapons. In the
market-place we meet again, and every one will be carried onward by our gathering
stream. The enemy will see themselves surrounded, overwhelmed, and be compelled
to yield. How can a handful of slaves resist us? And he will return among us, he will see
himself rescued, and can for once thank us, us, who are already so deeply in his debt.
He will behold, perchance, ay doubtless, he will again behold the morn's red dawn in
the free heavens.
Carpenter. What ails thee, maiden?
Clara. Can ye misunderstand me? I speak of the Count! I speak of Egmont.
Jetter. Speak not the name! 'tis deadly.
Clara. Not speak his name? How? Not Egmont's name? Is it not on every tongue?
Where stands it not inscribed? Often have I read it emblazoned with all its letters
among these stars. Not utter it? What mean ye? Friends! good, kind neighbours, ye are
dreaming; collect yourselves. Gaze not upon me with those fixed and anxious looks!
Cast not such timid glances on every side! I but give utterance to the wish of all. Is not
my voice the voice of your own hearts? Who, in this fearful night, ere he seeks his
restless couch, but on bended knee will, in earnest prayer, seek to wrest his life as a
cherished boon from heaven? Ask each other! Let each ask his own heart! And who
but exclaims with me,—"Egmont's liberty, or death!"
Jetter. God help us! This is a sad business.
Clara. Stay! Stay! Shrink not away at the sound of his name, to meet whom ye were
wont to press forward so joyously!—When rumour announced his approach, when the
cry arose, "Egmont comes! He comes from Ghent!"—then happy indeed were those
citizens who dwelt in the streets through which he was to pass. And when the neighing
of his steed was heard, did not every one throw aside his work, while a ray of hope and
joy, like a sunbeam from his countenance, stole over the toil-worn faces that peered
from every window. Then, as ye stood in the doorways, ye would lift up your children
in your arms, and pointing to him, exclaim: "See, that is Egmont, he who towers above
the rest! 'Tis from bird that ye must look for better times than those your poor fathers
have known." Let not your children inquire at some future day, "Where is he? Where
are the better times ye promised us?"—Thus we waste the time in idle words! do
nothing,—betray him.
Soest. Shame on thee, Brackenburg! Let her not run on thus! Prevent the mischief!
Brackenburg. Dear Clara! Let us go! What will your Mother say? Perchance—
Clara. Thinkest thou I am a child, or frantic? What avails perchance?—With no vain
hope canst thou hide from me this dreadful certainty... Ye shall hear me and ye will: for
I see it, ye are overwhelmed, ye cannot hearken to the voice of your own hearts.
Through the present peril cast but one glance into the past,—the recent past. Send
your thoughts forward into the future. Could ye live, would ye live, were he to perish?
With him expires the last breath of freedom. What was he not to you? For whose sake
did he expose himself to the direst perils? His blood flowed, his wounds were healed
for you alone. The mighty spirit, that upheld you all, a dungeon now confines, while
the horrors of secret murder are hovering around. Perhaps he thinks of you—perhaps
he hopes in you,—he who has been accustomed only to grant favours to others and to
fulfil their prayers.
Carpenter. Come, gossip.
Clara. I have neither the arms, nor the vigour of a man; but I have that which ye all
lack—courage and contempt of danger. O that my breath could kindle your souls!
That, pressing you to this bosom, I could arouse and animate you! Come! I will march
in your midst!—As a waving banner, though weaponless, leads on a gallant army of
warriors, so shall my spirit hover, like a flame, over your ranks, while love and courage
shall unite the dispersed and wavering multitude into a terrible host.
Jetter. Take her away; I pity her, poor thing!
[Exeunt Burgers.
Brackenburg. Clara! Seest thou not where we are?
Clara. Where? Under the dome of heaven, which has so often seemed to arch itself
more gloriously as the noble Egmont passed beneath it. From these windows I have
seen them look forth, four or five heads one above the other; at these doors the
cowards have stood, bowing and scraping, if he but chanced to look down upon them!
Oh, how dear they were to me, when they honoured him. Had he been a tyrant they
might have turned with indifference from his fall! But they loved him! O ye hands, so
prompt to wave caps in his honour, can ye not grasp a sword? Brackenburg, and we?—
do we chide them? These arms that have so often embraced him, what do they for him
now? Stratagem has accomplished so much in the world. Thou knowest the ancient
castle, every passage, every secret way.—Nothing is impossible,—suggest some plan—
Brackenburg. That we might go home!
Clara. Well.
Brackenburg. There at the corner I see Alva's guard; let the voice of reason penetrate
to thy heart! Dost thou deem me a coward? Dost thou doubt that for thy sake I would
peril my life? Here we are both mad, I as well as thou. Dost thou not perceive that thy
scheme is impracticable? Oh, be calm! Thou art beside thyself.
Clara. Beside myself! Horrible. You, Brackenburg, are beside yourself. When you hailed
the hero with loud acclaim, called him your friend, your hope, your refuge, shouted
vivats as he passed;—then I stood in my corner, half opened the window, concealed
myself while I listened, and my heart beat higher than yours who greeted him so
loudly. Now it again beats higher! In the hour of peril you conceal yourselves, deny
him, and feel not, that if he perish, you are lost.
Brackenburg. Come home.
Clara. Home?
Brackenburg. Recollect thyself! Look around thee! These are the streets in which thou
weft wont to appear only on the Sabbath-day, when thou didst walk modestly to
church; where, over-decorous perhaps, thou wert displeased if I but joined thee with a
kindly greeting. And now thou dost stand, speak, and act before the eyes of the whole
world. Recollect thyself, love! How can this avail us?
Clara. Home! Yes, I remember. Come, Brackenburg, let us go home! Knowest thou
where my home lies?
[Exeunt.
SCENE II.—A Prison
Lighted by a lamp, a couch in the background
Egmont (alone). Old friend! Ever faithful sleep, dost thou too forsake me, like my other
friends? How wert thou wont of yore to descend unsought upon my free brow, cooling
my temples as with a myrtle wreath of love! Amidst the din of battle, on the waves of
life, I rested in thine arms, breathing lightly as a growing boy. When tempests whistled
through the leaves and boughs, when the summits of the lofty trees swung creaking in
the blast, the inmost core of my heart remained unmoved. What agitates thee now?
What shakes thy firm and steadfast mind? I feel it, 'tis the sound of the murderous axe,
gnawing at thy root. Yet I stand erect, but an inward shudder runs through my frame.
Yes, it prevails, this treacherous power; it undermines the firm, the lofty stem, and ere
the bark withers, thy verdant crown falls crashing to the earth.
Yet wherefore now, thou who hast so often chased the weightiest cares like bubbles
from thy brow, wherefore canst thou not dissipate this dire foreboding which
incessantly haunts thee in a thousand different shapes? Since when hast thou
trembled at the approach of death, amid whose varying forms, thou weft wont calmly
to dwell, as with the other shapes of this familiar earth. But 'tis not he, the sudden foe,
to encounter whom the sound bosom emulously pants;—-'tis the dungeon, emblem of
the grave, revolting alike to the hero and the coward. How intolerable I used to feel it,
in the stately hall, girt round by gloomy walls, when, seated on my cushioned chair, in
the solemn assembly of the princes, questions, which scarcely required deliberation,
were overlaid with endless discussions, while the rafters of the ceiling seemed to stifle
and oppress me. Then I would hurry forth as soon as possible, fling myself upon my
horse with deep-drawn breath, and away to the wide champaign, man's natural
element, where, exhaling from the earth, nature's richest treasures are poured forth
around us, while, from the wide heavens, the stars shed down their blessings through
the still air; where, like earth-born giants, we spring aloft, invigorated by our Mother's
touch; where our entire humanity and our human desires throb in every vein; where
the desire to press forward, to vanquish, to snatch, to use his clenched fist, to possess,
to conquer, glows through the soul of the young hunter; where the warrior, with rapid
stride, assumes his inborn right to dominion over the world; and, with terrible liberty,
sweeps like a desolating hailstorm over the field and grove, knowing no boundaries
traced by the hand of man.
Thou art but a shadow, a dream of the happiness I so long possessed; where has
treacherous fate conducted thee? Did she deny thee to meet the rapid stroke of nevershunned death, in the open face of day, only to prepare for thee a foretaste of the
grave, in the midst of this loathsome corruption? How revolting its rank odour exhales
from these damp stones! Life stagnates, and my foot shrinks from the couch as from
the grave. Oh care, care! Thou who dost begin prematurely the work of murder,—
forbear;—Since when has Egmont been alone, so utterly alone in the world? 'Tis doubt
renders thee insensible, not happiness. The justice of the king, in which through life
thou hast confided, the friendship of the Regent, which, thou mayst confess it, was
akin to love,—have these suddenly vanished, like a meteor of the night, and left thee
alone upon thy gloomy path? Will not Orange, at the head of thy friends, contrive
some daring scheme? Will not the people assemble, and with gathering might, attempt
the rescue of their faithful friend?
Ye walls, which thus gird me round, separate me not from the well-intentioned zeal of
so many kindly souls. And may the courage with which my glance was wont to inspire
them, now return again from their hearts to mine. Yes! they assemble in thousands!
they come! they stand beside me! their pious wish rises urgently to heaven, and
implores a miracle; and if no angel stoops for my deliverance, I see them grasp eagerly
their lance and sword. The gates are forced, the bolts are riven, the walls fall beneath
their conquering hands, and Egmont advances joyously, to hail the freedom of the
rising morn. How many well-known faces receive me with loud acclaim! O Clara! wert
thou a man, I should see thee here the very first, and thank thee for that which it is
galling to owe even to a king—liberty.
SCENE III.—Clara's House
Clara (enters from her chamber with a lamp and a glass of water; she places the glass
upon the table and steps to the window).
Brackenburg, is it you? What noise was that? No one yet? No one! I will set the lamp in
the window, that he may see that I am still awake, that I still watch for him. He
promised me tidings. Tidings? horrible certainty!—Egmont condemned!—what
tribunal has the right to summon him?—And they dare to condemn him!—Does the
king condemn him, or the duke? And the Regent withdraws herself! Orange hesitates,
and all his friends!—Is this the world, of whose fickleness and treachery I have heard
so much, and as yet experienced nothing? Is this the world?—Who could be so base as
to hear malice against one so dear? Could villainy itself be audacious enough to
overwhelm with sudden destruction the object of a nation's homage? Yet so it is—it isO Egmont, I held thee safe before God and man, safe as in my arms! What was I to
thee. Thou hast called me thine, my whole being was devoted to thee. What am I
now? In vain I stretch out my hand to the toils that environ thee. Thou helpless and I
free!—Here is the key that unlocks my chamber door. My going out and my coming in,
depend upon my own caprice; yet, alas; to aid thee I am powerless!—Oh, bind me that
I may not despair; hurl me into the deepest dungeon, that I may dash my head against
the damp walls, groan for freedom, and dream how I would rescue him if fetters did
not hold me bound.—Now I am free, and in freedom lies the anguish of impotence.—
Conscious of my own existence, yet unable to stir a limb in his behalf, alas! even this
insignificant portion of thy being, thy Clara, is, like thee, a captive, and, separated from
thee, consumes her expiring energies in the agonies of death.—I hear a stealthy
step,—a cough—Brackenburg,—'tis he!—Kind, unhappy man, thy destiny remains ever
the same; thy love opens to thee the door at night, alas! to what a doleful meeting.
(Enter Brackenburg.) Thou com'st so pale, so terrified! Brackenburg! What is it?
Brackenburg. I have sought thee through perils and circuitous paths. The principal
streets are occupied with troops;—through lanes and by-ways have I stolen to thee!
Clara. Tell me, how is it?
Brackenburg (seating himself). O Clara, let me weep. I loved him not. He was the rich
man who lured to better a pasture the poor man's solitary lamb. I have never cursed
him, God has created me with a true and tender heart. My life was consumed in
anguish, and each day I hoped would end my misery.
Clara. Let that be forgotten, Brackenburg! Forget thyself. Speak to me of him! Is it
true? Is he condemned?
Brackenburg. He is! I know it.
Clara. And still lives?
Brackenburg. Yes, he still lives.
Clara. How canst thou be sure of that? Tyranny murders the hero in the night! His
blood flows concealed from every eye. The people stunned and bewildered, lie buried
in sleep, dream of deliverance, dream of the fulfilment of their impotent wishes, while,
indignant at our supineness, his spirit abandons the world. He is no more! Deceive me
not; deceive not thyself!
Brackenburg. No,—he lives! and the Spaniards, alas, are preparing for the people, on
whom they are about to trample, a terrible spectacle, in order to crush for ever, by a
violent blow, each heart that yet pants for freedom.
Clara. Proceed! Calmly pronounce my death-warrant also! Near and more near I
approach that blessed land, and already from those realms of peace, I feel the breath
of consolation say on.
Brackenburg. From casual words, dropped here and there by the guards, I learned that
secretly in the market-place they were preparing some terrible spectacle. Through byways and familiar lanes I stole to my cousin's house, and from a back window, looked
out upon the market-place. Torches waved to and fro, in the hands of a wide circle of
Spanish soldiers. I sharpened my unaccustomed sight, and out of the darkness there
arose before me a scaffold, black, spacious, and lofty! The sight filled me with horror.
Several persons were employed in covering with black cloth such portions of the
wood-work as yet remained white and visible. The steps were covered last, also with
black;—I saw it all. They seemed preparing for the celebration of some horrible
sacrifice. A white crucifix, that shone like silver through the night, was raised on one
side. As I gazed the terrible conviction strengthened in my mind. Scattered torches still
gleamed here and there; gradually they flickered and went out. Suddenly the hideous
birth of night returned into its Mother's womb.
Clara. Hush, Brackenburg! Be still! Let this veil rest upon my soul. The spectres are
vanished; and thou, gentle night, lend thy mantle to the inwardly fermenting earth,
she will no longer endure the loathsome burden, shuddering, she rends open her
yawning chasms, and with a crash swallows the murderous scaffold. And that God,
whom in their rage they have insulted, sends down His angel from on high; at the
hallowed touch of the messenger bolts and bars fly back; he pours around our friend a
mild radiance, and leads him gently through the night to liberty. My path leads also
through the darkness to meet him.
Brackenburg (detaining her). My child, whither wouldst thou go? What wouldst thou
do?
Clara. Softly, my friend, lest some one should awake! Lest we should awake ourselves!
Know'st thou this phial, Brackenburg? I took it from thee once in jest, when thou, as
was thy wont, didst threaten, in thy impatience, to end thy days.—And now my
friend—
Brackenburg. In the name of all the saints!
Clara. Thou canst not hinder me. Death is my portion! Grudge me not the quiet and
easy death which thou hadst prepared for thyself. Give me thine hand!—At the
moment when I unclose that dismal portal through which there is no return, I may tell
thee, with this pressure of the hand, how sincerely I have loved, how deeply I have
pitied thee. My brother died young; I chose thee to fill his place; thy heart rebelled,
thou didst torment thyself and me, demanding with ever increasing fervour that which
fate had not destined for thee. Forgive me and farewell! Let me call thee brother! 'Tis a
name that embraces many names. Receive, with a true heart, the last fair token of the
departing spirit—take this kiss. Death unites all, Brackenburg—us too it will unite!
Brackenburg. Let me then die with thee! Share it! oh, share it! There is enough to
extinguish two lives.
Clara. Hold! Thou must live, thou canst live.—Support my Mother, who, without thee,
would be a prey to want. Be to her what I can no longer be, live together, and weep for
me. Weep for our fatherland, and for him who could alone have upheld it. The present
generation must still endure this bitter woe; vengeance itself could not obliterate it.
Poor souls, live on, through this gap in time, which is time no longer. To-day the world
suddenly stands still, its course is arrested, and my pulse will beat but for a few
minutes longer. Farewell.
Brackenburg. Oh, live with us, as we live only for thy sake! In taking thine own life,
thou wilt take ours also; still live and suffer. We will stand by thee, nothing shall sever
us from thy side, and love, with ever-watchful solicitude, shall prepare for thee the
sweetest consolation in its loving arms. Be ours! Ours! I dare not say, mine.
Clara. Hush, Brackenburg! Thou feelest not what chord thou touchest. Where hope
appears to thee, I see only despair.
Brackenburg. Share hope with the living! Pause on the brink of the precipice, cast one
glance into the gulf below, and then look back on us.
Clara. I have conquered; call me not back to the struggle.
Brackenburg. Thou art stunned; enveloped in night, thou seekest the abyss. Every light
is not yet extinguished, yet many days—!
Clara. Alas! Alas! Cruelly thou dost rend the veil from before mine eyes. Yes, the day
will dawn! Despite its misty shroud it needs must dawn. Timidly the burgher razes from
his window, night leaves behind an ebon speck; he looks, and the scaffold looms
fearfully in the morning light. With re-awakened anguish the desecrated image of the
Saviour lifts to the Father its imploring eyes. The sun veils his beams, he will not mark
the hero's death-hour. Slowly the fingers go their round—one hour strikes after
another—hold! Now is the time. The thought of the morning scares me into the grave.
(She goes to the window as if to look out, and drinks secretly.)
Brackenburg. Clara! Clara!
Clara (goes to the table, and drinks water). Here is the remainder. I invite thee not to
follow me. Do as thou wilt; farewell. Extinguish this lamp silently and without delay; I
am going to rest. Steal quietly away, close the door after thee. Be still! Wake not my
Mother! Go, save thyself, if thou wouldst not be taken for my murderer. [Exit.
Brackenburg. She leaves me for the last time as she has ever done. What human soul
could conceive how cruelly she lacerates the heart that loves her? She leaves me to
myself, leaves me to choose between life and death, and both are alike hateful to me.
To die alone! Weep, ye tender souls! Fate has no sadder doom than mine. She shares
with me the death-potion, yet sends me from her side! She draws me after her, yet
thrusts me back into life! Oh, Egmont, how enviable a lot falls to thee! She goes before
thee! The crown of victory from her hand is thine, she brings all heaven to meet
thee!—And shall I follow? Again to stand aloof? To carry this inextinguishable jealousy
even to yon distant realms? Earth is no longer a tarrying place for me, and hell and
heaven offer equal torture. Now welcome to the wretched the dread hand of
annihilation!
[Exit. (The scene remains some time unchanged. Music sounds, indicating Clara's
death; the lamp, which Brackenburg had forgotten to extinguish, flares up once or
twice, and then suddenly expires. The scene changes to.)
SCENE IV.—A Prison
Egmont is discovered sleeping on a couch. A rustling of keys is heard; the door opens;
servants enter with torches; Ferdinand and Silva follow, accompanied by soldiers.
Egmont starts from his sleep.
Egmont. Who are ye that thus rudely banish slumber from my eyes? What mean these
vague and insolent glances? Why this fearful procession? With what dream of horror
come ye to delude my half awakened soul?
Silva. The duke sends us to announce your sentence.
Egmont. Do ye also bring the headsman who is to execute it?
Silva. Listen, and you will know the doom that awaits you.
Egmont. It is in keeping with the rest of your infamous proceedings. Hatched in night
and in night achieved, so would this audacious act of injustice shroud itself from
observation!—Step boldly forth, thou who dost bear the sword concealed beneath thy
mantle; here is my head, the freest ever severed by tyranny from the trunk.
Silva. You err! The righteous judges who have condemned you will not conceal their
sentence from the light of day.
Egmont. Then does their audacity exceed all imagination and belief. Silva (takes the
sentence from an attendant, unfolds it, and reads). "In the King's name, and invested
by his Majesty with authority to judge all his subjects of whatever rank, not excepting
the knights of the Golden Fleece, we declare—-"
Egmont. Can the king transfer that authority?
Silva. "We declare, after a strict and legal investigation, thee, Henry, Count Egmont,
Prince of Gaure, guilty of high treason, and pronounce thy sentence:—That at early
dawn thou be led from this prison to the market-place, and that there, in sight of the
people, and as a warning to all traitors, thou with the sword be brought from life to
death. Given at Brussels." (Date and year so indistinctly read as to be imperfectly heard
by the audience.) "Ferdinand, Duke of Alva, President of the Tribunal of Twelve." Thou
knowest now thy doom. Brief time remains for thee to prepare for the impending
stroke, to arrange thy affairs, and to take leave of thy friends.
[Exit Silva with followers. Ferdinand remains with two torch-bearers. The stage is dimly
lighted.
Egmont (stands for a time as if buried in thought, and allows Silva to retire without
looking round. He imagines himself alone, and, on raising his eyes, beholds Alva's son).
Thou tarriest here? Wouldst thou by thy presence augment my amazement, my
horror? Wouldst thou carry to thy father the welcome tidings that in unmanly fashion I
despair? Go. Tell him that he deceives neither the world nor me. At first it will be
whispered cautiously behind his back, then spoken more and more loudly, and when
at some future day the ambitious man descends from his proud eminence, a thousand
voices will proclaim—that 'twas not the welfare of the state, not the honour of the
king, not the tranquillity of the provinces, that brought him hither. For his own selfish
ends he, the warrior, has counselled war, that in war the value of his services might be
enhanced. He has excited this monstrous insurrection that his presence might be
deemed necessary in order to quell it. And I fall a victim to his mean hatred, his
contemptible envy. Yes, I know it, dying and mortally wounded I may utter it; long has
the proud man envied me, long has he meditated and planned my ruin.
Even then, when still young, we played at dice together, and the heaps of gold, one
after the other, passed rapidly from his side to mine; he would look on with affected
composure, while inwardly consumed with rage, more at my success than at his own
loss. Well do I remember the fiery glance, the treacherous pallor that overspread his
features when, at a public festival, we shot for a wager before assembled thousands.
He challenged me, and both nations stood by; Spaniards and Netherlanders wagered
on either side; I was the victor; his ball missed, mine hit the mark, and the air was rent
by acclamations from my friends. His shot now hits me. Tell him that I know this, that I
know him, that the world despises every trophy that a paltry spirit erects for itself by
base and surreptitious arts. And thou!
If it be possible for a son to swerve from the manners of his father, practise shame
betimes, while thou art compelled to feel shame for him whom thou wouldst fain
revere with thy whole heart.
Ferdinand. I listen without interrupting thee! Thy reproaches fall like blows upon a
helmet. I feel the shock, but I am armed. They strike, they wound me not; I am sensible
only to the anguish that lacerates my heart. Alas! Alas! Have I lived to witness such a
scene? Am I sent hither to behold a spectacle like this?
Egmont. Dost thou break out into lamentations? What moves, what agitates thee
thus? Is it a late remorse at having lent thyself to this infamous conspiracy? Thou art so
young, thy exterior is so prepossessing? Thy demeanour towards me was so friendly,
so unreserved! So long as I beheld thee, I was reconciled with thy father; and crafty,
ay, more crafty than he, thou hast lured me into the toils. Thou art the wretch! The
monster! Who so confides in him, does so at his own peril; but who could apprehend
danger in trusting thee? Go! Go! rob me not of the few moments that are left me! Go,
that I may collect my thoughts, the world forget, and first of all thyself!
Ferdinand. What can I say? I stand and gaze on thee, yet see thee not; I am scarcely
conscious of my own existence. Shall I seek to excuse myself? Shall I assure thee that it
was not till the last moment that I was made aware of my father's intentions? That I
acted as a constrained, a passive instrument of his will? What signifies now the opinion
thou mayst entertain of me? Thou art lost; and I, miserable wretch, stand here only to
assure thee of it, only to lament thy doom.
Egmont. What strange voice, what unexpected consolation comes thus to cheer my
passage to the grave? Thou, the son of my first, of almost my only enemy, thou dost
pity me, thou art not associated with my murderers? Speak! In what light must I regard
thee?
Ferdinand. Cruel father! Yes, I recognize thy nature in this command. Thou didst know
my heart, my disposition, which thou hast so often censured as the inheritance of a
tender-hearted Mother. To mould me into thine own likeness thou hast sent me
hither. Thou dost compel me to behold this man on the verge of the yawning grave, in
the grasp of an arbitrary doom, that I may experience the profoundest anguish; that
thus, rendered callous to every fate, I may henceforth meet every event with a heart
unmoved.
Egmont. I am amazed! Be calm! Act, speak like a man.
Ferdinand. Oh, that I were a woman! That they might say—what moves, what agitates
thee? Tell me of a greater, a more monstrous crime, make me the spectator of a more
direful deed; I will thank thee, I will say: this was nothing.
Egmont. Thou dost forget thyself. Consider where thou art!
Ferdinand. Let this passion rage, let me give vent to my anguish! I will not seem
composed when my whole inner being is convulsed. Thee must I behold here? Thee? It
is horrible! Thou understandest me not! How shouldst thou understand me? Egmont!
Egmont!
(Falling on his neck.)
Egmont. Explain this mystery.
Ferdinand. It is no mystery.
Egmont. How can the fate of a mere stranger thus deeply move thee?
Ferdinand. Not a stranger! Thou art no stranger to me. Thy name it was that, even
from my boyhood, shone before me like a star in heaven! How often have I made
inquiries concerning thee, and listened to the story of thy deeds! The youth is the hope
of the boy, the man of the youth. Thus didst thou walk before me, ever before me; I
saw thee without envy, and followed after, step by step; at length I hoped to see
thee—I saw thee, and my heart flew to thy embrace. I had destined thee for myself,
and when I beheld thee, I made choice of thee anew. I hoped now to know thee, to
live with thee, to be thy friend,—thy—'tis over now and I see thee here!
Egmont. My friend, if it can be any comfort to thee, be assured that the very moment
we met my heart was drawn towards thee. Now listen! Let us exchange a few quiet
words. Tell me: is it the stern, the settled purpose of thy father to take my life?
Ferdinand. It is.
Egmont. This sentence is not a mere empty scarecrow, designed to terrify me, to
punish me through fear and intimidation, to humiliate me, that he may then raise me
again by the royal favour?
Ferdinand. Alas, no! At first I flattered myself with this delusive hope; and even then
my heart was filled with grief and anguish to behold thee thus. Thy doom is real! Is
certain! No, I cannot command myself. Who will counsel, who will aid me, to meet the
inevitable?
Egmont. Hearken then to me! If thy heart is impelled so powerfully in my favour, if
thou dost abhor the tyranny that holds me fettered, then deliver me! The moments
are precious. Thou art the son of the all-powerful, and thou hast power thyself. Let us
fly! I know the roads; the means of effecting our escape cannot be unknown to thee.
These walls, a few short miles, alone separate me from my friends. Loose these fetters,
conduct me to them; be ours. The king, on some future day, will doubtless thank my
deliverer. Now he is taken by surprise, or perchance he is ignorant of the whole
proceeding. Thy father ventures on this daring step, and majesty, though horror-struck
at the deed, must needs sanction the irrevocable. Thou dost deliberate? Oh, contrive
for me the way to freedom! Speak; nourish hope in a living soul.
Ferdinand. Cease! Oh, cease! Every word deepens my despair. There is here no outlet,
no counsel, no escape.—'Tis this thought that tortures me, that seizes my heart, and
rends it as with talons. I have myself spread the net; I know its firm, inextricable knots;
I know that every avenue is barred alike to courage and to stratagem. I feel that I too,
like thyself, like all the rest, am fettered. Think'st thou that I should give way to
lamentation if any means of safety remained untried? I have thrown myself at his feet,
remonstrated, implored. He has sent me hither, in order to blast in this fatal moment,
every remnant of joy and happiness that yet survived within my heart.
Egmont. And is there no deliverance?
Ferdinand. None!
Egmont (stamping his foot). No deliverance!-Sweet life! Sweet, pleasant habitude of
existence and of activity! from thee must I part! So calmly part! Not in the tumult of
battle, amid the din of arms, the excitement of the fray, dost thou send me a hasty
farewell; thine is no hurried leave; thou dost not abridge the moment of separation.
Once more let me clasp thy hand, gaze once more into thine eyes, feel with keen
emotion, thy beauty and thy worth, then resolutely tear myself away, and say;—
depart!
Ferdinand. Must I stand by, and look passively on; unable to save thee, or to give thee
aid! What voice avails for lamentation! What heart but must break under the pressure
of such anguish?
Egmont. Be calm!
Ferdinand. Thou canst be calm, thou canst renounce, led on by necessity, thou canst
advance to the direful struggle, with the courage of a hero. What can I do? What ought
I to do? Thou dost conquer thyself and us; thou art the victor; I survive both myself and
thee. I have lost my light at the banquet, my banner on the field. The future lies before
me, dark, desolate, perplexed.
Egmont. Young friend, whom by a strange fatality, at the same moment, I both win and
lose, who dost feel for me, who dost suffer for me the agonies of death,—look on
me;—thou wilt not lose me. If my life was a mirror in which thou didst love to
contemplate thyself, so be also my death. Men are not together only when in each
other's presence;—the distant, the departed, also live for us. I shall live for thee, and
for myself I have lived long enough. I have enjoyed each day; each day, I have
performed, with prompt activity, the duties enjoined by my conscience. Now my life
ends, as it might have ended, long, long, ago, on the sands of Gravelines. I shall cease
to live; but I have lived. My friend, follow in my steps, lead a cheerful and a joyous life,
and dread not the approach of death.
Ferdinand. Thou shouldst have saved thyself for us, thou couldst have saved thyself.
Thou art the cause of thine own destruction. Often have I listened when able men
discoursed concerning thee; foes and friends, they would dispute long as to thy worth;
but on one point they were agreed, none ventured to deny, every one confessed, that
thou wert treading a dangerous path. How often have I longed to warn thee! Hadst
thou then no friends?
Egmont. I was warned.
Ferdinand. And when I found all these allegations, point for point, in the indictment,
together with thy answers, containing much that might serve to palliate thy conduct,
but no evidence weighty enough fully to exculpate thee—
Egmont. No more of this. Man imagines that he directs his life, that he governs his
actions, when in fact his existence is irresistibly controlled by his destiny. Let us not
dwell upon this subject; these reflections I can dismiss with ease—not so my
apprehensions for these provinces; yet they too will be cared for. Could my blood flow
for many, bring peace to my people, how freely should it flow! Alas! This may not be.
Yet it ill becomes a man idly to speculate, when the power to act is no longer his. If
thou canst restrain or guide the fatal power of thy father; do so. Alas, who can?—
Farewell!
Ferdinand. I cannot leave thee.
Egmont. Let me urgently recommend my followers to thy care! I have worthy men in
my service; let them not be dispersed, let them not become destitute! How fares it
with Richard, my secretary?
Ferdinand. He is gone before thee. They have beheaded him, as thy accomplice in high
treason.
Egmont. Poor soul!—Yet one word, and then farewell, I can no more. However
powerfully the spirit may be stirred, nature at length irresistibly asserts her rights; and
like a child, who, enveloped in a serpent's folds, enjoys refreshing slumber, so the
weary one lays himself down to rest before the gates of death, and sleeps soundly, as
though a toilsome journey yet lay before him.—One word more,—I know a maiden;
thou wilt not despise her because she was mine. Since I can recommend her to thy
care, I shall die in peace. Thy soul is noble; in such a man, a woman is sure to find a
protector. Lives my old Adolphus? Is he free?
Ferdinand. The active old man, who always attended thee on horseback?
Egmont. The same.
Ferdinand. He lives, he is free.
Egmont. He knows her dwelling; let him guide thy steps thither, and reward him to his
dying day, for having shown thee the way to this jewel.—Farewell!
Ferdinand. I cannot leave thee.
Egmont (urging him towards the door). Farewell!
Ferdinand. Oh, let me linger yet a moment!
Egmont. No leave-taking, my friend.
(He accompanies Ferdinand to the door, and then tears himself away; Ferdinand,
overwhelmed with grief, hastily retires.)
Egmont (alone)
Egmont. Cruel man! Thou didst not think to render me this service through thy son. He
has been the means of relieving my mind from the pressure of care and sorrow, from
fear and every anxious feeling. Gently, yet urgently, nature claims her final tribute. 'Tis
past!—'Tis resolved! And the reflections which, in the suspense of last night, kept me
wakeful on my couch, now with resistless certainty lull my senses to repose.
(He seats himself upon the couch; music)
Sweet sleep! Like the purest happiness, thou comest most willingly, uninvited,
unsought. Thou dost loosen the knots of earnest thoughts, dost mingle all images of
joy and of sorrow, unimpeded the circle of inner harmony flows on, and wrapped in
fond delusion, we sink into oblivion, and cease to be.
(He sleeps; music accompanies his slumber. Behind his couch the wall appears to open
and discovers a brilliant apparition. Freedom, in a celestial garb, surrounded by a glory,
reposes on a cloud. Her features are those of Clara and she inclines towards the
sleeping hero. Her countenance betokens compassion, she seems to lament his fate.
Quickly she recovers herself and with an encouraging gesture exhibits the symbols of
freedom, the bundle of arrows, with the staff and cap. She encourages him to be of
good cheer, and while she signifies to him that his death will secure the freedom of the
provinces, she hails him as a conqueror, and extends to him a laurel crown. As the
wreath approaches his head, Egmont moves like one asleep, and reclines with his face
towards her. She holds the wreath suspended over his head,—martial music is heard in
the distance, at the first sound the vision disappears. The music grows louder and
louder. Egmont awakes. The prison is dimly illuminated by the dawn.—His first impulse
is to lift his hand to his head, he stands up, and gazes round, his hand still upraised.)
The crown is vanished! Beautiful vision, the light of day has frighted thee! Yes, their
revealed themselves to my sight uniting in one radiant form the two sweetest joys of
my heart. Divine Liberty borrowed the mien of my beloved one; the lovely maiden
arrayed herself in the celestial garb of my friend. In a solemn moment they appeared
united, with aspect more earnest than tender. With bloodstained feet the vision
approached, the waving folds of her robe also were tinged with blood. It was my
blood, and the blood of many brave hearts. No! It shall not be shed in vain! Forward!
Brave people! The goddess of liberty leads you on! And as the sea breaks through and
destroys the barriers that would oppose its fury, so do ye overwhelm the bulwark of
tyranny, and with your impetuous flood sweep it away from the land which it usurps.
(Drums.)
Hark! Hark! How often has this sound summoned my joyous steps to the field of battle
and of victory! How bravely did I tread, with my gallant comrades, the dangerous path
of fame! And now, from this dungeon I shall go forth, to meet a glorious death; I die
for freedom, for whose cause I have lived and fought, and for whom I now offer myself
up at sorrowing sacrifice.
(The background is occupied by Spanish soldiers with halberts.)
Yes, lead them on! Close your ranks, ye terrify me not. I am accustomed to stand amid
the serried ranks of war, and environed by the threatening forms of death, to feel,
with double zest, the energy of life. (Drums.)
The foe closes round on every side! Swords are flashing; courage, friends! Behind are
your parents, your wives, your children! (Pointing to the guard.)
And these are impelled by the word of their leader, not by their own free will. Protect
your homes! And to save those who are most dear to you, be ready to follow my
example, and to fall with joy.
(Drums. As he advances through the guards towards the door in the background, the
curtain falls. The music joins in, and the scene closes with a symphony of victory.)