THIS BOOK CONTAINS THE RECORDS LEFT US by a man whom, according to the
expression he often used himself, we called the Steppenwolf. Whether this manuscript needs any
introductory remarks may be open to question. I, however, feel the need of adding a few pages to
those of the Steppenwolf in which I try to record my recollections of him. What I know of him is
little enough. Indeed, of his past life and origins I know nothing at all. Yet the impression left by
his personality has remained, in spite of all, a deep and sympathetic one.
Some years ago the Steppenwolf, who was then approaching fifty, called on my aunt to
inquire for a furnished room. He took the attic room on the top floor and the bedroom next it,
returned a day or two later with two trunks and a big case of books and stayed nine or ten months
with us. He lived by himself very quietly, and but for the fact that our bedrooms were next door
to each other—which occasioned a good many chance encounters on the stairs and in the
passage—we should have remained practically unacquainted. For he was not a sociable man.
Indeed, he was unsociable to a degree I had never before experienced in anybody. He was, in
fact, as he called himself, a real wolf of the Steppes, a strange, wild, shy—very shy—being from
another world than mine. How deep the loneliness into which his life had drifted on account of
his disposition and destiny and how consciously he accepted this loneliness as his destiny, I
certainly did not know until I read the records he left behind him. Yet, before that, from our
occasional talks and encounters, I became gradually acquainted with him, and I found that the
portrait in his records was in substantial agreement with the paler and less complete one that our
personal acquaintance had given me.
By chance I was there at the very moment when the Steppenwolf entered our house for the
first time and became my aunt's lodger. He came at noon. The table had not been cleared and I
still had half an hour before going back to the office. I have never forgotten the odd and very
conflicting impressions he made on me at this first encounter. He came through the glazed door,
having just rung the bell, and my aunt asked him in the dim light of the hall what he wanted. The
Steppenwolf, however, first threw up his sharp, closely cropped head and sniffed around
nervously before he either made any answer or announced his name.
"Oh, it smells good here," he said, and at that he smiled and my aunt smiled too. For my part,
I found this matter of introducing himself ridiculous and was not favorably impressed.
"However," said he, "I've come about the room you have to let."
I did not get a good look at him until we were all three on our way up to the top floor. Though
not very big, he had the bearing of a big man. He wore a fashionable and comfortable winter
overcoat and he was well, though carelessly, dressed, clean-shaven, and his cropped head
showed here and there a streak of grey. He carried himself in a way I did not at all like at first.
There was something weary and undecided about it that did not go with his keen and striking
profile nor with the tone of his voice. Later, I found out that his health was poor and that walking
tired him. With a peculiar smile—at that time equally unpleasant to me—he contemplated the
stairs, the walls, and windows, and the tall old cupboards on the staircase. All this seemed to
please and at the same time to amuse him. Altogether he gave the impression of having come out
of an alien world, from another continent perhaps. He found it all very charming and a little odd.
I cannot deny that he was polite, even friendly. He agreed at once and without objection to the
terms for lodging and breakfast and so forth, and yet about the whole man there was a foreign
and, as I chose to think, disagreeable or hostile atmosphere. He took the room and the bedroom

too, listened attentively and amiably to all he was told about the heating, the water, the service
and the rules of the household, agreed to everything, offered at once to pay a sum in advance—
and yet he seemed at the same time to be outside it all, to find it comic to be doing as he did and
not to take it seriously. It was as though it were a very odd and new experience for him, occupied
as he was with quite other concerns, to be renting a room and talking to people in German. Such
more or less was my impression, and it would certainly not have been a good one if it had not
been revised and corrected by many small instances. Above all, his face pleased me from the
first, in spite of the foreign air it had. It was a rather original face and perhaps a sad one, but
alert, thoughtful, strongly marked and highly intellectual. And then, to reconcile me further,
there was his polite and friendly manner, which though it seemed to cost him some pains, was all
the same quite without pretension; on the contrary, there was something almost touching,
imploring in it. The explanation of it I found later, but it disposed me at once in his favor.
Before we had done inspecting the rooms and going into the arrangements, my luncheon hour
was up and I had to go back to business. I took my leave and left him to my aunt. When I got
back at night, she told me that he had taken the rooms and was coming in in a day or two. The
only request he had made was that his arrival should not be notified to the police, as in his poor
state of health he found these formalities and the standing about in official waiting rooms more
than he could tolerate. I remember very well how this surprised me and how I warned my aunt
against giving in to his stipulation. This fear of the police seemed to me to agree only too well
with the mysterious and alien air the man had and struck me as suspicious. I explained to my
aunt that she ought not on any account to put herself in this equivocal and in any case rather
peculiar position for a complete stranger; it might well turn out to have very unpleasant
consequences for her. But it then came out that my aunt had already granted his request, and,
indeed, had let herself be altogether captivated and charmed by the strange gentleman. For she
never took a lodger with whom she did not contrive to stand in some human, friendly, and as it
were auntlike or, rather, motherly relation; and many a one has made full use of this weakness of
hers. And thus for the first weeks things went on; I had many a fault to find with the new lodger,
while my aunt every time warmly took his part.
As I was not at all pleased about this business of neglecting to notify the police, I wanted at
least to know what my aunt had learnt about him; what sort of family he came of and what his
intentions were. And, of course, she had learnt one thing and another, although he had only
stayed a short while after I left at noon. He had told her that he thought of spending some months
in our town to avail himself of the libraries and to see its antiquities. I may say it did not please
my aunt that he was only taking the rooms for so short a time, but he had clearly quite won her
heart in spite of his rather peculiar way of presenting himself. In short, the rooms were let and
my objections came too late.
"Why on earth did he say that it smelt so good here?" I asked.
"I know well enough," she replied, with her usual insight. "There's a smell of cleanliness and
good order here, of comfort and respectability. It was that that pleased him. He looks as if he
weren't used to that of late and missed it."
Just so, thought I to myself.
"But," I said aloud, "if he isn't used to an orderly and respectable life, what is going to
happen? What will you say if he has filthy habits and makes dirt everywhere, or comes home
drunk at all hours of the night?"
"We shall see, we shall see," she said, and laughed; and I left it at that.
And in the upshot my fears proved groundless. The lodger, though he certainly did not live a
very orderly or rational life, was no worry or trouble to us. Yet my aunt and I bothered our heads
a lot about him, and I confess I have not by a long way done with him even now. I often dream
of him at night, and the mere existence of such a man, much as I got to like him, has had a
thoroughly disturbing and disquieting effect on me.

Two days after this the stranger's luggage—his name was Harry Haller—was brought in by a
porter. He had a very fine leather trunk, which made a good impression on me, and a big flat
cabin trunk that showed signs of having traveled far—at least it was plastered with labels of
hotels and travel agencies of various countries, some overseas.
Then he himself appeared, and the time began during which I gradually got acquainted with
this strange man. At first I did nothing on my side to encourage it. Although Haller interested me
from the moment I saw him, I took no steps for the first two or three weeks to run across him or
to get into conversation with him. On the other hand I confess that I did, all the same and from
the very first, keep him under observation a little, and also went into his room now and again
when he was out and my curiosity drove me to do a little spy work.
I have already given some account of the Steppenwolf's outward appearance. He gave at the
very first glance the impression of a significant, an uncommon, and unusually gifted man. His
face was intellectual, and the abnormally delicate and mobile play of his features reflected a soul
of extremely emotional and unusually delicate sensibility. When one spoke to him and he, as was
not always the case, dropped conventionalities and said personal and individual things that came
out of his own alien world, then a man like myself came under his spell on the spot. He had
thought more than other men, and in matters of the intellect he had that calm objectivity, that
certainty of thought and knowledge, such as only really intellectual men have, who have no axe
to grind, who never wish to shine, or to talk others down, or to appear always in the right.
I remember an instance of this in the last days he was here, if I can call a mere fleeting glance
he gave me an example of what I mean. It was when a celebrated historian, philosopher, and
critic, a man of European fame, had announced a lecture in the school auditorium. I had
succeeded in persuading the Steppenwolf to attend it, though at first he had little desire to do so.
We went together and sat next to each other in the lecture hall. When the lecturer ascended the
platform and began his address, many of his hearers, who had expected a sort of prophet, were
disappointed by his rather dapper appearance and conceited air. And when he proceeded, by way
of introduction, to say a few flattering things to the audience, thanking them for their attendance
in such numbers, the Steppenwolf threw me a quick look, a look which criticized both the words
and the speaker of them—an unforgettable and frightful look which spoke volumes! It was a
look that did not simply criticize the lecturer, annihilating the famous man with its delicate but
crushing irony. That was the least of it. It was more sad than ironical; it was indeed utterly and
hopelessly sad; it conveyed a quiet despair, born partly of conviction, partly of a mode of
thought which had become habitual with him. This despair of his not only unmasked the
conceited lecturer and dismissed with its irony the matter at hand, the expectant attitude of the
public, the somewhat presumptuous title under which the lecture was announced—no, the
Steppenwolf's look pierced our whole epoch, its whole overwrought activity, the whole surge
and strife, the whole vanity, the whole superficial play of a shallow, opinionated intellectuality.
And alas! the look went still deeper, went far below the faults, defects and hopelessness of our
time, our intellect, our culture alone. It went right to the heart of all humanity, it bespoke
eloquently in a single second the whole despair of a thinker, of one who knew the full worth and
meaning of man's life. It said: "See what monkeys we are! Look, such is man!" and at once all
renown, all intelligence, all the attainments of the spirit, all progress towards the sublime, the
great and the enduring in man fell away and became a monkey's trick!
With this I have gone far ahead and, contrary to my actual plan and intention, already
conveyed what Haller essentially meant to me; whereas my original aim was to uncover his
picture by degrees while telling the course of my gradual acquaintance with him.
Now that I have gone so far ahead it will save time to say a little more about Haller's puzzling
"strangeness" and to tell in detail how I gradually guessed and became aware of the causes and
meaning of this strangeness, this extraordinary and frightful loneliness. It will be better so, for I
wish to leave my own personality as far as possible in the background. I do not want to put down

my own confessions, to tell a story or to write an essay on psychology, but simply as an
eyewitness to contribute something to the picture of the peculiar individual who left this
Steppenwolf manuscript behind him.
At the very first sight of him, when he came into my aunt's home, craning his head like a bird
and praising the smell of the house, I was at once astonished by something curious about him;
and my first natural reaction was repugnance. I suspected (and my aunt, who unlike me is the
very reverse of an intellectual person, suspected very much the same thing)—I suspected that the
man was ailing, ailing in the spirit in some way, or in his temperament or character, and I shrank
from him with the instinct of the healthy. This shrinking was in course of time replaced by a
sympathy inspired by pity for one who had suffered so long and deeply, and whose loneliness
and inward death I witnessed. In course of time I was more and more conscious, too, that this
affliction was not due to any defects of nature, but rather to a profusion of gifts and powers
which had not attained to harmony. I saw that Haller was a genius of suffering and that in the
meaning of many sayings of Nietzsche he had created within himself with positive genius a
boundless and frightful capacity for pain. I saw at the same time that the root of his pessimism
was not world-contempt but self-contempt; for however mercilessly he might annihilate
institutions and persons in his talk he never spared himself. It was always at himself first and
foremost that he aimed the shaft, himself first and foremost whom he hated and despised.
And here I cannot refrain from a psychological observation. Although I know very little of the
Steppenwolf's life, I have all the same good reason to suppose that he was brought up by devoted
but severe and very pious parents and teachers in accordance with that doctrine that makes the
breaking of the will the corner-stone of education and upbringing. But in this case the attempt to
destroy the personality and to break the will did not succeed. He was much too strong and hardy,
too proud and spirited. Instead of destroying his personality they succeeded only in teaching him
to hate himself. It was against himself that, innocent and noble as he was, he directed during his
whole life the whole wealth of his fancy, the whole of his thought; and in so far as he let loose
upon himself every barbed criticism, every anger and hate he could command, he was, in spite of
all, a real Christian and a real martyr. As for others and the world around him he never ceased in
his heroic and earnest endeavor to love them, to be just to them, to do them no harm, for the love
of his neighbor was as deeply in him as the hatred of himself, and so his whole life was an
example that love of one's neighbor is not possible without love of oneself, and that self-hate is
really the same thing as sheer egoism, and in the long run breeds the same cruel isolation and
despair.
It is now time, however, to put my own thoughts aside and to get to facts. What I first
discovered about Haller, partly through my espionage, partly from my aunt's remarks, concerned
his way of living. It was soon obvious that his days were spent with his thoughts and his books,
and that he pursued no practical calling. He lay always very late in bed. Often he was not up
much before noon and went across from his bedroom, to his sitting room in his dressing gown.
This sitting room, a large and comfortable attic room with two windows, after a few days was
not at all the same as when occupied by other tenants. It filled up more and more as time went
on. Pictures were hung on the walls, drawings tacked up—sometimes illustrations cut out from
magazines and often changed. A southern landscape, photographs of a little German country
town, apparently Haller's home, hung there, and between them were some brightly painted water
colors, which, as we discovered later, he had painted himself. Then there were photographs of a
pretty young woman, or—rather—girl. For a long while a Siamese Buddha hung on the wall, to
be replaced first by Michelangelo's "Night," then by a portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. Books filled
the large bookcase and lay everywhere else as well, on the table, on the pretty old bureau, on the
sofa, on the chairs and all about on the floor, books with notes slipped into them which were
continually changing. The books constantly increased, for besides bringing whole armfuls back
with him from the libraries he was always getting parcels of them by post. The occupant of this
room might well be a learned man; and to this the all-pervading smell of cigar smoke might

testify as well as the stumps and ash of cigars all about the room. Many of the books, however,
were not of a scholarly nature. The majority were works of the poets of all times and peoples.
For a long while there lay about on the sofa where he often spent whole days all six volumes of a
work with the title Sophia's Journey from Memet to Saxony—a work of the latter part of the
eighteenth century. A complete edition of Goethe and one of Jean Paul showed signs of wear,
also Novalis, while Lessing, Jacobi and Lichtenberg were in the same condition. A few volumes
of Dostoievski bristled with penciled slips. On the big table among the books and papers there
was often a vase of flowers. There, too, a paint box, generally full of dust, reposed among flakes
of cigar ash and (to leave nothing out) sundry bottles of wine. There was a straw-covered bottle
usually containing Italian red wine, which he procured from a little shop in the neighborhood;
often, too, a bottle of Burgundy as well as Malaga; and a squat bottle of Cherry brandy was, as I
saw, nearly emptied in a very brief space—after which it disappeared in a corner of the room,
there to collect the dust without further diminution of its contents. I will not pretend to justify
this espionage I carried on, and I will say openly that all these signs of a life full of intellectual
curiosity, but thoroughly slovenly and disorderly all the same, inspired me at first with aversion
and mistrust. I am not only a middle-class man, living a regular life, fond of work and
punctuality; I am also an abstainer and nonsmoker, and these bottles in Haller's room pleased me
even less than the rest of his artistic disorder.
He was just as irregular and irresponsible about his meal times as he was about his hours of
sleep and work. There were days when he did not go out at all and had nothing but his coffee in
the morning. Sometimes my aunt found nothing but a banana peel to show that he had dined.
Other days, however, he took his meals in restaurants, sometimes in the best and most
fashionable, sometimes in little out-lying taverns. His health did not seem good. Besides his
limping gait that often made the stairs fatiguing to him, he seemed to be plagued with other
troubles, and he once said to me that it was years since he had had either good digestion or sound
sleep. I put it down first and last to his drinking. When, later on, I accompanied him sometimes
to his haunts I often saw with my own eyes how he drank when the mood was on him, though
neither I nor anyone else ever saw him really drunk.
I have never forgotten our first encounter. We knew each other then only as fellow lodgers
whose rooms were adjoining ones. Then one evening I came home from business and to my
astonishment found Haller seated on the landing between the first and second floors. He was
sitting on the top step and he moved to one side to let me pass. I asked him if he was all right and
offered to take him up to the top.
Haller looked at me and I could see that I had awoken him from a kind of trance. Slowly he
began to smile his delightful sad smile that has so often filled my heart with pity. Then he invited
me to sit beside him. I thanked him, but said it was not my custom to sit on the stairs at other
people's doors.
"Ah, yes," he said, and smiled the more. "You're quite right. But wait a moment, for I really
must tell you what it was made me sit here for a bit."
He pointed as he spoke to the entrance of the first floor flat, where a widow lived. In the little
space with parquet flooring between the stairs, the window and the glazed front door there stood
a tall cupboard of mahogany, with some old pewter on it, and in front of the cupboard on the
floor there were two plants, an azalea and an araucaria, in large pots which stood on low stands.
The plants looked very pretty and were always kept spotlessly neat and clean, as I had often
noticed with pleasure.
"Look at this little vestibule," Haller went on, "with the araucaria and its wonderful smell.
Many a time I can't go by without pausing a moment. At your aunt's too, there reigns a
wonderful smell of order and extreme cleanliness, but this little place of the araucaria, why, it's
so shiningly clean, so dusted and polished and scoured, so inviolably clean that it positively
glitters. I always have to take a deep breath of it as I go by. Don't you smell it too, a fragrance
given off by the odor of floor polish and a faint whiff of turpentine together with the mahogany

and the washed leaves of the plants—the very essence of bourgeois cleanliness, of neatness and
meticulousness, of duty and devotion shown in little things. I don't know who lives here, but
behind that glazed door there must be a paradise of cleanliness and spotless mediocrity, of
ordered ways, a touching and anxious devotion to life's little habits and tasks.
"Do not, please, think for a moment," he went on when I said nothing in reply, "that I speak
with irony. My dear sir, I would not for the world laugh at the bourgeois life. It is true that I live
myself in another world, and perhaps I could not endure to live a single day in a house with
araucarias. But though I am a shabby old Steppenwolf, still I'm the son of a mother, and my
mother too was a middle-class man's wife and raised plants and took care to have her house and
home as clean and neat and tidy as ever she could make it. All that is brought back to me by this
breath of turpentine and by the araucaria, and so I sit down here every now and again; and I look
into this quiet little garden of order and rejoice that such things still are."
He wanted to get up, but found it difficult; and he did not repulse me when I offered him a
little help. I was silent, but I submitted just as my aunt had done before me to a certain charm the
strange man could sometimes exercise. We went slowly up the stairs together, and at his door,
the key in his hand, he looked me once more in the eyes in a friendly way and said; "You've
come from business? Well, of course, I know little of all that. I live a bit to one side, on the edge
of things, you see. But you too, I believe, interest yourself in books and such matters. Your aunt
told me one day that you had been through the high school and were a good Greek scholar. Now,
this morning I came on a passage in Novalis. May I show it you? It would delight you, I know."
He took me into his room, which smelt strongly of tobacco, and took out a book from one of
the heaps, turned the leaves and looked for the passage.
"This is good too, very good," he said, "listen to this: 'A man should be proud of suffering. All
suffering is a reminder of our high estate.' Fine! Eighty years before Nietzsche. But that is not the
sentence I meant. Wait a moment, here I have it. This: 'Most men will not swim before they are
able to.' Is not that witty? Naturally, they won't swim! They are born for the solid earth, not for
the water. And naturally they won't think. They are made for life, not for thought. Yes, and he
who thinks, what's more, he who makes thought his business, he may go far in it, but he has
bartered the solid earth for the water all the same, and one day he will drown."
He had got hold of me now. I was interested; and I stayed on a short while with him; and after
that we often talked when we met on the stairs or in the street. On such occasions I always had at
first the feeling that he was being ironical with me. But it was not so. He had a real respect for
me, just as he had for the araucaria. He was so convinced and conscious of his isolation, his
swimming in the water, his uprootedness, that a glimpse now and then of the orderly daily
round—the punctuality, for example, that kept me to my office hours, or an expression let fall by
a servant or tramway conductor—acted on him literally as a stimulus without in the least
arousing his scorn. At first all this seemed to me a ridiculous exaggeration, the affectation of a
gentleman of leisure, a playful sentimentality. But I came to see more and more that from the
empty spaces of his lone wolfishness he actually really admired and loved our little bourgeois
world as something solid and secure, as the home and peace which must ever remain far and
unattainable, with no road leading from him to them. He took off his hat to our charwoman, a
worthy person, every time he met her, with genuine respect; and when my aunt had any little
occasion to talk to him, to draw his attention, it might be, to some mending of his linen or to
warn him of a button hanging loose on his coat, he listened to her with an air of great attention
and consequence, as though it were only with an extreme and desperate effort that he could force
his way through any crack into our little peaceful world and be at home there, if only for an hour.
During that very first conversation, about the araucaria, he called himself the Steppenwolf,
and this too estranged and disturbed me a little. What an expression! However, custom did not
only reconcile me to it, but soon I never thought of him by any other name; nor could I today hit
on a better description of him. A wolf of the Steppes that had lost its way and strayed into the
towns and the life of the herd, a more striking image could not be found for his shy loneliness,

his savagery, his restlessness, his homesickness, his homelessness.
I was able once to observe him for a whole evening. It was at a Symphony concert, where to
my surprise I found him seated near me. He did not see me. First some Handel was played, noble
and lovely music. But the Steppenwolf sat absorbed in his own thoughts, paying attention neither
to the music nor to his surroundings. He sat there detached, a lonely stranger, with downcast eyes
and a cold but troubled expression on his face. After the Handel came a little symphony by
Friedemann Bach, and I saw with surprise how after a few bars my stranger began to smile and
abandon himself to the music. He was completely absorbed in himself, and for about ten minutes
so happily lost and rapt in pleasant dreams that I paid more attention to him than to the music.
When the piece ended he woke up, and made a movement to go; but after all he kept his seat and
heard the last piece too. It was Variations by Reger, a composition that many found rather long
and tiresome. The Steppenwolf, too, who at first made up his mind to listen, wandered again, put
his hands into his pockets and sank once more into his own thoughts, not happily and dreamily
as before, but sadly and finally irritated. His face was once more vacant and grey. The light in it
was quenched and he looked old, ill, and discontented.
I saw him again after the concert in the street and walked along behind him. Wrapped in his
cloak he went his way joylessly and wearily in the direction of our quarter, but stopped in front
of a small old-fashioned inn, and after looking irresolutely at the time, went in. I obeyed a
momentary impulse and followed him; and there he sat at a table in the backroom of the bar,
greeted by hostess and waitress as a well-known guest. Greeting him, too, I took my seat beside
him. We sat there for an hour, and while I drank two glasses of mineral water, he accounted for a
pint of red wine and then called for another half. I remarked that I had been to the concert, but he
did not follow up this topic. He read the label on my bottle and asked whether I would not drink
some wine. When I declined his offer and said that I never drank it, the old helpless expression
came over his face.
"You're quite right there," he said. "I have practised abstinence myself for years, and had my
time of fasting, too, but now I find myself once more beneath the sign of Aquarius, a dark and
humid constellation."
And then, when I playfully took up his allusion and remarked how unlikely it seemed to me
that he really believed in astrology, he promptly resumed the too polite tone which often hurt me
and said: "You are right. Unfortunately, I cannot believe in that science either."
I took my leave and went. It was very late before he came in, but his step was as usual, and as
always, instead of going straight to bed, he stayed up an hour longer in his sitting room, as I from
my neighboring room could hear plainly enough.
There was another evening which I have not forgotten. My aunt was out and I was alone in
the house, when the doorbell rang. I opened the door and there stood a young and very pretty
woman, whom, as soon as she asked for Mr. Haller, I recognized from the photograph in his
room. I showed her his door and withdrew. She stayed a short while above, but soon I heard
them both come down stairs and go out, talking and laughing together very happily. I was much
astonished that the hermit had his love, and one so young and pretty and elegant; and all my
conjectures about him and his life were upset once more. But before an hour had gone he came
back alone and dragged himself wearily upstairs with his sad and heavy tread. For hours on end
he paced softly to and fro in his sitting room, exactly like a wolf in its cage. The whole night,
nearly until dawn, there was light in his room. I know nothing at all about this occasion, and
have only this to add. On one other occasion I saw him in this lady's company. It was in one of
the streets of the town. They were arm in arm and he looked very happy; and again I wondered
to see how much charm—what an even childlike expression—his care-ridden face had
sometimes. It explained the young lady to me, also the predilection my aunt had for him. That
day, too, however, he came back in the evening, sad, and wretched as usual. I met him at the
door and under his cloak, as many a time before, he had the bottle of Italian wine, and he sat with
it half the night in his hell upstairs. It grieved me. What a comfortless, what a forlorn and

shiftless life he led!
And now I have gossiped enough. No more is needed to show that the Steppenwolf lived a
suicidal existence. But all the same I do not believe that he took his own life when, after paying
all he owed but without a word of warning or farewell, he left our town one day and vanished.
We have not heard from him since and we are still keeping some letters that came for him after
he had left. He left nothing behind but his manuscript. It was written during the time he was here,
and he left it with a few lines to say that I might do what I liked with it.
It was not in my power to verify the truth of the experiences related in Haller's manuscript. I
have no doubt that they are for the most part fictitious, not, however, in the sense of arbitrary
invention. They are rather the deeply lived spiritual events which he has attempted to express by
giving them the form of tangible experiences. The partly fantastic occurrences in Haller's fiction
come presumably from the later period of his stay here, and I have no doubt that even they have
some basis in real occurrence. At that time our guest did in fact alter very much in behavior and
in appearance. He was out a great deal, for whole nights sometimes; and his books lay
untouched. On the rare occasions when I saw him at that time I was very much struck, by his air
of vivacity and youth. Sometimes, indeed, he seemed positively happy. This does not mean that a
new and heavy depression did not follow immediately. All day long he lay in bed. He had no
desire for food. At that time the young lady appeared once more on the scene, and an extremely
violent, I may even say brutal, quarrel occurred which upset the whole house and for which
Haller begged my aunt's pardon for days after.
No, I am sure he has not taken his life. He is still alive, and somewhere wearily goes up and
down the stairs of strange houses, stares somewhere at clean-scoured parquet floors and carefully
tended araucarias, sits for days in libraries and nights in taverns, or lying on a hired sofa, listens
to the world beneath his window and the hum of human life from which he knows that he is
excluded. But he has not killed himself, for a glimmer of belief still tells him that he is to drink
this frightful suffering in his heart to the dregs, and that it is of this suffering he must die. I think
of him often. He has not made life lighter for me. He had not the gift of fostering strength and
joy in me. Oh, on the contrary! But I am not he, and I live my own life, a narrow, middle-class
life, but a solid one, filled with duties. And so we can think of him peacefully and affectionately,
my aunt and I. She would have more to say of him than I have, but that lies buried in her good
heart.
And now that we come to these records of Haller's, these partly diseased, partly beautiful, and
thoughtful fantasies, I must confess that if they had fallen into my hands by chance and if I had
not known their author, I should most certainly have thrown them away in disgust. But owing to
my acquaintance with Haller I have been able, to some extent, to understand them, and even to
appreciate them. I should hesitate to share them with others if I saw in them nothing but the
pathological fancies of a single and isolated case of a diseased temperament. But I see something
more in them. I see them as a document of the times, for Haller's sickness of the soul, as I now
know, is not the eccentricity of a single individual, but the sickness of the times themselves, the
neurosis of that generation to which Haller belongs, a sickness, it seems, that by no means
attacks the weak and worthless only but, rather, precisely those who are strongest in spirit and
richest in gifts.
These records, however much or however little of real life may lie at the back of them, are not
an attempt to disguise or to palliate this widespread sickness of our times. They are an attempt to
present the sickness itself in its actual manifestation. They mean, literally, a journey through hell,
a sometimes fearful, sometimes courageous journey through the chaos of a world whose souls
dwell in darkness, a journey undertaken with the determination to go through hell from one end
to the other, to give battle to chaos, and to suffer torture to the full.
A remark of Haller's gave me the key to this interpretation. He said to me once when we were
talking of the so-called horrors of the Middle Ages: "These horrors were really nonexistent. A

man of the Middle Ages would detest the whole mode of our present-day life as something far
more than horrible, far more than barbarous. Every age, every culture, every custom and
tradition has its own character, its own weakness and its own strength, its beauties and ugliness;
accepts certain sufferings as matters of course, puts up patiently with certain evils. Human life is
reduced to real suffering, to hell, only when two ages, two cultures and religions overlap. A man
of the Classical Age who had to live in medieval times would suffocate miserably just as a
savage does in the midst of our civilisation. Now there are times when a whole generation is
caught in this way between two ages, two modes of life, with the consequence that it loses all
power to understand itself and has no standard, no security, no simple acquiescence. Naturally,
every one does not feel this equally strongly. A nature such as Nietzsche's had to suffer our
present ills more than a generation in advance. What he had to go through alone and
misunderstood, thousands suffer today."
I often had to think of these words while reading the records. Haller belongs to those who
have been caught between two ages, who are outside of all security and simple acquiescence. He
belongs to those whose fate it is to live the whole riddle of human destiny heightened to the pitch
of a personal torture, a personal hell.
Therein, it seems to me, lies the meaning these records can have for us, and because of this I
decided to publish them. For the rest, I neither approve nor condemn them. Let every reader do
as his conscience bids him.

HARRY
HALLER'S
RECORDS

"FOR MADMEN ONLY"

THE DAY HAD GONE BY JUST AS DAYS GO BY. I had killed it in accordance with my
primitive and retiring way of life. I had worked for an hour or two and perused the pages of old
books. I had had pains for two hours, as elderly people do. I had taken a powder and been very
glad when the pains consented to disappear. I had lain in a hot bath and absorbed its kindly
warmth. Three times the mail had come with undesired letters and circulars to look through. I
had done my breathing exercises, but found it convenient today to omit the thought exercises. I
had been for an hour's walk and seen the loveliest feathery cloud patterns penciled against the
sky. That was very delightful. So was the reading of the old books. So was the lying in the warm
bath. But, taken all in all, it had not been exactly a day of rapture. No, it had not even been a day
brightened with happiness and joy. Rather, it had been just one of those days which for a long
while now had fallen to my lot; the moderately pleasant, the wholly bearable and tolerable,
lukewarm days of a discontented middle-aged man; days without special pains, without special
cares, without particular worry, without despair; days when I calmly wonder, objective and
fearless, whether it isn't time to follow the example of Adalbert Stifter and have an accident
while shaving.
He who has known the other days, the angry ones of gout attacks, or those with that wicked
headache rooted behind the eyeballs that casts a spell on every nerve of eye and ear with a
fiendish delight in torture, or soul-destroying, evil days of inward vacancy and despair, when, on
this distracted earth, sucked dry by the vampires of finance, the world of men and of so-called
culture grins back at us with the lying, vulgar, brazen glamor of a Fair and dogs us with the
persistence of an emetic, and when all is concentrated and focused to the last pitch of the
intolerable upon your own sick self—he who has known these days of hell may be content
indeed with normal half-and-half days like today. Thankfully you sit by the warm stove,
thankfully you assure yourself as you read your morning paper that another day has come and no
war broken out, no new dictatorship has been set up, no particularly disgusting scandal been
unveiled in the worlds of politics or finance. Thankfully you tune the strings of your moldering
lyre to a moderated, to a passably joyful, nay, to an even delighted psalm of thanksgiving and
with it bore your quiet, flabby and slightly stupefied half-and-half god of contentment; and in the
thick warm air of a contented boredom and very welcome painlessness the nodding mandarin of
a half-and-half god and the nodding middle-aged gentleman who sings his muffled psalm look as
like each other as two peas.
There is much to be said for contentment and painlessness, for these bearable and submissive

days, on which neither pain nor pleasure is audible, but pass by whispering and on tip-toe. But
the worst of it is that it is just this contentment that I cannot endure. After a short time it fills me
with irrepressible hatred and nausea. In desperation I have to escape and throw myself on the
road to pleasure, or, if that cannot be, on the road to pain. When I have neither pleasure nor pain
and have been breathing for a while the lukewarm insipid air of these so-called good and
tolerable days, I feel so bad in my childish soul that I smash my moldering lyre of thanksgiving
in the face of the slumbering god of contentment and would rather feel the very devil burn in me
than this warmth of a well-heated room. A wild longing for strong emotions and sensations
seethes in me, a rage against this toneless, flat, normal and sterile life. I have a mad impulse to
smash something, a warehouse, perhaps, or a cathedral, or myself, to commit outrages, to pull off
the wigs of a few revered idols, to provide a few rebellious schoolboys with the longed-for ticket
to Hamburg, or to stand one or two representatives of the established order on their heads. For
what I always hated and detested and cursed above all things was this contentment, this
healthiness and comfort, this carefully preserved optimism of the middle classes, this fat and
prosperous brood of mediocrity.
It was in such a mood then that I finished this not intolerable and very ordinary day as dusk
set in. I did not end it in a manner becoming a rather ailing man and go to bed tempted by a hot
water bottle. Instead I put on my shoes ill-humoredly, discontented and disgusted with the little
work I had done, and went out into the dark and foggy streets to drink what men according to an
old convention call "a glass of wine," at the sign of the Steel Helmet.
So I went down the stairs from my room in the attic, those difficult stairs of this alien world,
those thoroughly bourgeois, well-swept and scoured stairs of a very respectable three-family
apartment house under whose roof I have my refuge. I don't know how it comes about, but I, the
homeless Steppenwolf, the solitary, the hater of life's petty conventions, always take up my
quarters in just such houses as this. It is an old weakness of mine. I live neither in palatial houses
nor in those of the humble poor, but instead and deliberately in these respectable and wearisome
and spotless middle-class homes, which smell of turpentine and soap and where there is a panic
if you bang the door or come in with dirty shoes. The love of this atmosphere comes, no doubt,
from the days of my childhood, and a secret yearning I have for something homelike drives me,
though with little hope, to follow the same old stupid road. Then again, I like the contrast
between my lonely, loveless, hunted, and thoroughly disorderly existence and this middle-class
family life. I like to breathe in on the stairs this odor of quiet and order, of cleanliness and
respectable domesticity. There is something in it that touches me in spite of my hatred for all it
stands for. I like to step across the threshold of my room where all this suddenly stops; where,
instead, cigar ash and wine bottles lie among the heaped-up books and there is nothing but
disorder and neglect; and where everything—books, manuscript, thoughts—is marked and
saturated with the plight of lonely men, with the problem of existence and with the yearning after
a new orientation for an age that has lost its bearings.
And now I came to the araucaria. I must tell you that on the first floor of this house the stairs
pass by a little vestibule at the entrance to a flat which, I am convinced, is even more spotlessly
swept and garnished than the others; for this little vestibule shines with a superhuman
housewifery. It is a little temple of order. On the parquet floor, where it seems desecration to
tread, are two elegant stands and on each a large pot. In the one grows an azalea. In the other a
stately araucaria, a thriving, straight-grown baby tree, a perfect specimen, which to the last
needle of the topmost twig reflects the pride of frequent ablutions. Sometimes, when I know that
I am unobserved, I use this place as a temple. I take my seat on a step of the stairs above the
araucaria and, resting awhile with folded hands, I contemplate this little garden of order and let
the touching air it has and its somewhat ridiculous loneliness move me to the depths of my soul.
I imagine behind this vestibule, in the sacred shadow, one may say, of the araucaria, a home full
of shining mahogany, and a life full of sound respectability—early rising, attention to duty,
restrained but cheerful family gatherings, Sunday church going, early to bed.

Affecting lightheartedness, I trod the moist pavements of the narrow streets. As though in
tears and veiled, the lamps glimmered through the chill gloom and sucked their reflections
slowly from the wet ground. The forgotten years of my youth came back to me. How I used to
love the dark, sad evenings of late autumn and winter, how eagerly I imbibed their moods of
loneliness and melancholy when wrapped in my cloak I strode for half the night through rain and
storm, through the leafless winter landscape, lonely enough then too, but full of deep joy, and
full of poetry which later I wrote down by candlelight sitting on the edge of my bed! All that was
past now. The cup was emptied and would never be filled again. Was that a matter for regret?
No, I did not regret the past. My regret was for the present day, for all the countless hours and
days that I lost in mere passivity and that brought me nothing, not even the shocks of awakening.
But, thank God, there were exceptions. There were now and then, though rarely, the hours that
brought the welcome shock, pulled down the walls and brought me back again from my
wanderings to the living heart of the world. Sadly and yet deeply moved, I set myself to recall
the last of these experiences. It was at a concert of lovely old music. After two or three notes of
the piano the door was opened of a sudden to the other world. I sped through heaven and saw
God at work. I suffered holy pains. I dropped all my defences and was afraid of nothing in the
world. I accepted all things and to all things I gave up my heart. It did not last very long, a
quarter of an hour perhaps; but it returned to me in a dream at night, and since, through all the
barren days, I caught a glimpse of it now and then. Sometimes for a minute or two I saw it
clearly, threading my life like a divine and golden track. But nearly always it was blurred in dirt
and dust. Then again it gleamed out in golden sparks as though never to be lost again and yet
was soon quite lost once more. Once it happened, as I lay awake at night, that I suddenly spoke
in verses, in verses so beautiful and strange that I did not venture to think of writing them down,
and then in the morning they vanished; and yet they lay hidden within me like the hard kernel
within an old brittle husk. Once it came to me while reading a poet, while pondering a thought of
Descartes, of Pascal; again it shone out and drove its gold track far into the sky while I was in the
presence of my beloved. Ah, but it is hard to find this track of the divine in the midst of this life
we lead, in this besotted humdrum age of spiritual blindness, with its architecture, its business,
its politics, its men! How could I fail to be a lone wolf, and an uncouth hermit, as I did not share
one of its aims nor understand one of its pleasures? I cannot remain for long in either theater or
picture-house. I can scarcely read a paper, seldom a modern book. I cannot understand what
pleasures and joys they are that drive people to the overcrowded railways and hotels, into the
packed cafés with the suffocating and oppressive music, to the Bars and variety entertainments,
to World Exhibitions, to the Corsos. I cannot understand nor share these joys, though they are
within my reach, for which thousands of others strive. On the other hand, what happens to me in
my rare hours of joy, what for me is bliss and life and ecstasy and exaltation, the world in
general seeks at most in imagination; in life it finds it absurd. And in fact, if the world is right, if
this music of the cafés, these mass enjoyments and these Americanised men who are pleased
with so little are right, then I am wrong, I am crazy. I am in truth the Steppenwolf that I often
call myself; that beast astray who finds neither home nor joy nor nourishment in a world that is
strange and incomprehensible to him.
With these familiar thoughts I went along the wet street through one of the quietest and oldest
quarters of the town. On the opposite side there stood in the darkness an old stone wall which I
always noticed with pleasure. Old and serene, it stood between a little church and an old hospital
and often during the day I let my eyes rest on its rough surface. There were few such quiet and
peaceful spaces in the center of the town where from every square foot some lawyer, or quack, or
doctor, or barber, or chiropodist shouted his name at you. This time, too, the wall was peaceful
and serene and yet something was altered in it. I was amazed to see a small and pretty doorway
with a Gothic arch in the middle of the wall, for I could not make up my mind whether this
doorway had always been there or whether it had just been made. It looked old without a doubt,
very old; apparently this closed portal with its door of blackened wood had opened hundreds of

years ago onto a sleepy convent yard, and did so still, even though the convent was no longer
there. Probably I had seen it a hundred times and simply not noticed it. Perhaps it had been
painted afresh and caught my eye for that reason. I paused to examine it from where I stood
without crossing over, as the street between was so deep in mud and water. From the sidewalk
where I stood and looked across, it seemed to me in the dim light that a garland, or something
gaily colored, was festooned round the doorway, and now that I looked more closely I saw over
the portal a bright shield, on which, it seemed to me, there was something written. I strained my
eyes and at last, in spite of the mud and puddles, went across, and there over the door I saw a
stain showing up faintly on the grey-green of the wall, and over the stain bright letters dancing
and then disappearing, returning and vanishing once more. So that's it, thought I. They've
disfigured this good old wall with an electric sign. Meanwhile I deciphered one or two of the
letters as they appeared again for an instant; but they were hard to read even by guess work, for
they came with very irregular spaces between them and very faintly, and then abruptly vanished.
Whoever hoped for any result from a display like that was not very smart. He was a
Steppenwolf, poor fellow. Why have his letters playing on this old wall in the darkest alley of the
Old Town on a wet night with not a soul passing by, and why were they so fleeting, so fitful and
illegible? But wait, at last I succeeded in catching several words on end. They were:
MAGIC THEATER
ENTRANCE NOT FOR EVERYBODY
I tried to open the door, but the heavy old latch would not stir. The display too was over. It
had suddenly ceased, sadly convinced of its uselessness. I took a few steps back, landing deep
into the mud, but no more letters came. The display was over. For a long time I stood waiting in
the mud, but in vain.
Then, when I had given up and gone back to the alley, a few colored letters were dropped here
and there, reflected on the asphalt in front of me. I read:
FOR MADMEN ONLY!
My feet were wet and I was chilled to the bone. Nevertheless, I stood waiting. Nothing more.
But while I waited, thinking how prettily the letters had danced in their ghostly fashion over the
damp wall and the black sheen of the asphalt, a fragment of my former thoughts came suddenly
to my mind; the similarity to the track of shining gold which suddenly vanishes and cannot be
found.
I was freezing and walked on following that track in my dreams, longing too for that doorway
to an enchanted theater, which was for madmen only. Meanwhile I had reached the market place,
where there is never a lack of evening entertainments. At every other step were placards and
posters with their various attractions, Ladies' Orchestra, Variété, Cinema, Ball. But none of these
was for me. They were for "everybody," for those normal persons whom I saw crowding every
entrance. In spite of that my sadness was a little lightened. I had had a greeting from another
world, and a few dancing, colored letters had played upon my soul and sounded its secret strings.
A glimmer of the golden track had been visible once again.
I sought out the little ancient tavern where nothing had altered since my first visit to this town
a good twenty-five years before. Even the landlady was the same as then and many of the
patrons who sat there in those days sat there still at the same places before the same glasses.
There I took refuge. True, it was only a refuge, something like the one on the stairs opposite the
araucaria. Here, too, I found neither home nor company, nothing but a seat from which to view a
stage where strange people played strange parts. Nonetheless, the quiet of the place was worth
something; no crowds, no music; only a few peaceful townsfolk at bare wooden tables (no
marble, no enamel, no plush, no brass) and before each his evening glass of good old wine.

Perhaps this company of habitués, all of whom I knew by sight, were all regular Philistines and
had in their Philistine dwellings their altars of the home dedicated to sheepish idols of
contentment; perhaps, too, they were solitary fellows who had been sidetracked, quiet,
thoughtful topers of bankrupt ideals, lone wolves and poor devils like me. I could not say. Either
homesickness or disappointment, or need of change drew them there, the married to recover the
atmosphere of his bachelor days, the old official to recall his student years. All of them were
silent, and all were drinkers who would rather, like me, sit before a pint of Elsasser than listen to
a Ladies' Orchestra. Here I cast anchor, for an hour, or it might be two. With the first sip of
Elsasser I realised that I had eaten nothing that day since my morning roll.
It is remarkable, all that men can swallow. For a good ten minutes I read a newspaper. I
allowed the spirit of an irresponsible man who chews and munches another's words in his mouth,
and gives them out again undigested, to enter into me through my eyes. I absorbed a whole
column of it. And then I devoured a large piece cut from the liver of a slaughtered calf. Odd
indeed! The best was the Elsasser. I am not fond, for everyday at least, of racy, heady wines that
diffuse a potent charm and have their own particular flavor. What I like the best is a clean, light,
modest country vintage of no special name. One can carry plenty of it and it has the good and
homely flavor of the land, and of earth and sky and woods. A pint of Elsasser and a piece of
good bread is the best of all meals. By this time, however, I had already eaten my portion of
liver, an unusual indulgence for me, as I seldom eat meat, and the second pint had been set
before me. And this too was odd: that somewhere in a green valley vines were tended by good,
strong fellows and the wine pressed so that here and there in the world, far away, a few
disappointed, quietly drinking townsfolk and dispirited Steppenwolves could sip a little heart and
courage from their glasses.
I didn't really care whether all this was odd or not. It was good, it helped, it raised my spirits.
As I thought again of that newspaper article and its jumble of words, a refreshing laughter rose in
me, and suddenly the forgotten melody of those notes of the piano came back to me again. It
soared aloft like a soap bubble, reflecting the whole world in miniature on its rainbow surface,
and then softly burst. Could I be altogether lost when that heavenly little melody had been
secretly rooted within me and now put forth its lovely bloom with all its tender hues? I might be
a beast astray, with no sense of its environment, yet there was some meaning in my foolish life,
something in me gave an answer and was the receiver of those distant calls from worlds far
above. In my brain were stored a thousand pictures:
Giotto's flock of angels from the blue vaulting of a little church in Padua, and near them
walked Hamlet and the garlanded Ophelia, fair similitudes of all sadness and misunderstanding
in the world, and there stood Gianozzo, the aeronaut, in his burning balloon and blew a blast on
his horn, Attila carrying his new headgear in his hand, and the Borobudur reared its soaring
sculpture in the air. And though all these figures lived in a thousand other hearts as well, there
were ten thousand more unknown pictures and tunes there which had no dwelling place but in
me, no eyes to see, no ears to hear them but mine. The old hospital wall with its grey-green
weathering, its cracks and stains in which a thousand frescoes could be fancied, who responded
to it, who looked into its soul, who loved it, who found the charm of its colors ever delicately
dying away? The old books of the monks, softly illumined with their miniatures, and the books
of the German poets of two hundred and a hundred years ago whom their own folk have
forgotten, all the thumbed and damp-stained volumes, and the works in print and manuscripts of
the old composers, the stout and yellowing music sheets dreaming their music through a winter
sleep—who heard their spirited, their roguish and yearning tones, who carried through a world
estranged from them a heart full of their spirit and their charm? Who still remembered that
slender cypress on a hill over Gubbio, that though split and riven by a fall of stone yet held fast
to life and put forth with its last resources a new sparse tuft at top? Who read by night above the
Rhine the cloudscript of the drifting mists? It was the Steppenwolf. And who over the ruins of
his life pursued its fleeting, fluttering significance, while he suffered its seeming

meaninglessness and lived its seeming madness, and who hoped in secret at the last turn of the
labyrinth of Chaos for revelation and God's presence?
I held my hand over my glass when the landlady wanted to fill it once more, and got up. I
needed no more wine. The golden trail was blazed and I was reminded of the eternal, and of
Mozart, and the stars. For an hour I could breathe once more and live and face existence, without
the need to suffer torment, fear, or shame.
A cold wind was sifting the fine rain as I went out into the deserted street. It drove the drops
with a patter against the streetlamps where they glimmered with a glassy sparkle. And now,
whither? If I had had a magic wand at this moment I should have conjured up a small and
charming Louis Seize music room where a few musicians would have played me two or three
pieces of Handel and Mozart. I was in the very mood for it, and would have sipped the cool and
noble music as gods sip nectar. Oh, if I had had a friend at this moment, a friend in an attic room,
dreaming by candlelight and with a violin lying ready at his hand! How I should have slipped up
to him in his quiet hour, noiselessly climbing the winding stair to take him by surprise, and then
with talk and music we should have held heavenly festival throughout the night! Once, in years
gone by, I had often known such happiness, but this too time had taken away. Withered years lay
between those days and now.
I loitered as I wended my way homeward; turned up my collar and struck my stick on the wet
pavement. However long I lingered outside I should find myself all too soon in my top-floor
room, my makeshift home, which I could neither love nor do without; for the time had gone by
when I could spend a wet winter's night in the open. And now my prayer was not to let the good
mood the evening had given me be spoiled, neither by the rain, nor by gout, nor by the araucaria;
and though there was no chamber music to be had nor a lonely friend with his violin, still that
lovely melody was in my head and I could play it through to myself after a fashion, humming the
rhythm of it as I drew my breath. Reflecting thus, I walked on and on. Yes, even without the
chamber music and the friend. How foolish to wear oneself out in vain longing for warmth!
Solitude is independence. It had been my wish and with the years I had attained it. It was cold.
Oh, cold enough! But it was also still, wonderfully still and vast like the cold stillness of space in
which the stars revolve.
From a dance hall there met me as I passed by the strains of lively jazz music, hot and raw as
the steam of raw flesh. I stopped a moment. This kind of music, much as I detested it, had always
had a secret charm for me. It was repugnant to me, and yet ten times preferable to all the
academic music of the day. For me too, its raw and savage gaiety reached an underworld of
instinct and breathed a simple honest sensuality.
I stood for a moment on the scent, smelling this shrill and blood-raw music, sniffing the
atmosphere of the hall angrily, and hankering after it a little too. One half of this music, the
melody, was all pomade and sugar and sentimentality. The other half was savage, temperamental
and vigorous. Yet the two went artlessly well together and made a whole. It was the music of
decline. There must have been such music in Rome under the later emperors. Compared with
Bach and Mozart and real music it was, naturally, a miserable affair; but so was all our art, all
our thought, all our makeshift culture in comparison with real culture. This music was at least
sincere, unashamedly primitive and childishly happy. There was something of the Negro in it,
and something of the American, who with all his strength seems so boyishly fresh and childlike
to us Europeans. Was Europe to become the same? Was it on the way already? Were we, the old
connoisseurs, the reverers of Europe as it used to be, of genuine music and poetry as once they
were, nothing but a pig-headed minority suffering from a complex neurosis, whom tomorrow
would forget or deride? Was all that we called culture, spirit, soul, all that we called beautiful
and sacred, nothing but a ghost long dead, which only a few fools like us took for true and
living? Had it perhaps indeed never been true and living? Had all that we poor fools bothered our
heads about never been anything but a phantom?
I was now in the old quarter of the town. The little church stood up dim and grey and unreal.

At once the experience of the evening came back to me, the mysterious Gothic doorway, the
mysterious tablet above it and the illuminated letters dancing in mockery. How did the writing
run? "Entrance not for Everybody." And: "For madmen only." I scrutinised the old wall opposite
in the secret hope that the magic night might begin again; the writing invite me, the madman; the
little doorway give me admittance. There perhaps lay my desire, and there perhaps would my
music be played.
The dark stone wall looked back at me with composure, shut off in a deep twilight, sunk in a
dream of its own. And there was no gateway anywhere and no pointed arch; only the dark
unbroken masonry. With a smile I went on, giving it a friendly nod. "Sleep well. I will not awake
you. The time will come when you will be pulled down or plastered with covetous
advertisements. But for the present, there you stand, beautiful and quiet as ever, and I love you
for it."
From the black mouth of an alley a man appeared with startling suddenness at my elbow, a
lone man going his homeward way with weary step. He wore a cap and a blue blouse, and above
his shoulders he carried a signboard fixed on a pole, and in front of him an open tray suspended
by straps such as pedlars carry at fairs. He walked on wearily in front of me without looking
round. Otherwise I should have bidden him a good evening and given him a cigar. I tried to read
the device on his standard—a red signboard on a pole—in the light of the next lamp; but it
swayed to and fro and I could decipher nothing. Then I called out and asked him to let me read
his placard. He stopped and held his pole a little steadier. Then I could read the dancing reeling
letters:
ANARCHIST EVENING ENTERTAINMENT
MAGIC THEATER
ENTRANCE NOT FOR EVERYBODY
"I've been looking for you," I shouted with delight. "What is this Evening Entertainment?
Where is it? When?"
He was already walking on.
"Not for everybody," he said dully with a sleepy voice. He had had enough. He was for home,
and on he went.
"Stop," I cried, and ran after him. "What have you got there in your box? I want to buy
something from you."
Without stopping, the man felt mechanically in his box, pulled out a little book and held it out
to me. I took it quickly and put it in my pocket. While I felt for the buttons of my coat to get out
some money, he turned in at a doorway, shut the door behind him and disappeared. His heavy
steps rang on a flagged yard, then on wooden stairs; and then I heard no more. And suddenly I
too felt very tired. It came over me that it must be very late—and high time to go home. I walked
on faster and, following the road to the suburb, I was soon in my own neighborhood among the
well-kept gardens, where in, clean little apartment houses behind lawn and ivy are the dwellings
of officialdom and people of modest means. Passing the ivy and the grass and the little fir tree I
reached the door of the house, found the keyhole and the switch, slipped past the glazed doors,
and the polished cupboards and the potted plants and unlocked the door of my room, my little
pretence of a home, where the armchair and the stove, the ink-pot and the paint-box, Novalis and
Dostoievski, awaited me just as do the mother, or the wife, the children, maids, dogs and cats in
the case of more sensible people.
As I threw off my wet coat I came upon the little book, and took it out. It was one of those
little books wretchedly printed on wretched paper that are sold at fairs, "Were you born in
January?" or "How to be twenty years younger in a week."
However, when I settled myself in my armchair and put on my glasses, it was with great
astonishment and a sudden sense of impending fate that I read the title on the cover of this

companion volume to fortune-telling booklets. "Treatise on the Steppenwolf. Not for
Everybody."
I read the contents at a sitting with an engrossing interest that deepened page by page.
TREATISE ON THE STEPPENWOLF
There was once a man, Harry, called the Steppenwolf. He went on two legs, wore clothes and
was a human being, but nevertheless he was in reality a wolf of the Steppes. He had learned a
good deal of all that people of a good intelligence can, and was a fairly clever fellow. What he
had not learned, however, was this: to find contentment in himself and his own life. The cause of
this apparently was that at the bottom of his heart he knew all the time (or thought he knew) that
he was in reality not a man, but a wolf of the Steppes. Clever men might argue the point whether
he truly was a wolf, whether, that is, he had been changed, before birth perhaps, from a wolf into
a human being, or had been given the soul of a wolf, though born as a human being; or whether,
on the other hand, this belief that he was a wolf was no more than a fancy or a disease of his. It
might, for example, be possible that in his childhood he was a little wild and disobedient and
disorderly, and that those who brought him up had declared a war of extinction against the beast
in him; and precisely this had given him the idea and the belief that he was in fact actually a
beast with only a thin covering of the human. On this point one could speak at length and
entertainingly, and indeed write a book about it. The Steppenwolf, however, would be none the
better for it, since for him it was all one whether the wolf had been bewitched or beaten into him,
or whether it was merely an idea of his own. What others chose to think about it or what he
chose to think himself was no good to him at all. It left the wolf inside him just the same.
And so the Steppenwolf had two natures, a human and a wolfish one. This was his fate, and it
may well be that it was not a very exceptional one. There must have been many men who have
had a good deal of the dog or the fox, of the fish or the serpent in them without experiencing any
extraordinary difficulties on that account. In such cases, the man and the fish lived on together
and neither did the other any harm. The one even helped the other. Many a man indeed has
carried this condition to such enviable lengths that he has owed his happiness more to the fox or
the ape in him than to the man. So much for common knowledge. In the case of Harry, however,
it was just the opposite. In him the man and the wolf did not go the same way together, but were
in continual and deadly enmity. One existed simply and solely to harm the other, and when there
are two in one blood and in one soul who are at deadly enmity, then life fares ill. Well, to each
his lot, and none is light.
Now with our Steppenwolf it was so that in his conscious life he lived now as a wolf, now as
a man, as indeed the case is with all mixed beings. But, when he was a wolf, the man in him lay
in ambush, ever on the watch to interfere and condemn, while at those times that he was a man
the wolf did just the same. For example, if Harry, as man, had a beautiful thought, felt a fine and
noble emotion, or performed a so-called good act, then the wolf bared his teeth at him and
laughed and showed him with bitter scorn how laughable this whole pantomime was in the eyes
of a beast, of a wolf who knew well enough in his heart what suited him, namely, to trot alone
over the Steppes and now and then to gorge himself with blood or to pursue a female wolf. Then,
wolfishly seen, all human activities became horribly absurd and misplaced, stupid and vain. But
it was exactly the same when Harry felt and behaved as a wolf and showed others his teeth and
felt hatred and enmity against all human beings and their lying and degenerate manners and
customs. For then the human part of him lay in ambush and watched the wolf, called him brute
and beast, and spoiled and embittered for him all pleasure in his simple and healthy and wild
wolf's being.
Thus it was then with the Steppenwolf, and one may well imagine that Harry did not have an
exactly pleasant and happy life of it. This does not mean, however, that he was unhappy in any
extraordinary degree (although it may have seemed so to himself all the same, inasmuch as every

man takes the sufferings that fall to his share as the greatest). That cannot be said of any man.
Even he who has no wolf in him, may be none the happier for that. And even the unhappiest life
has its sunny moments and its little flowers of happiness between sand and stone. So it was, then,
with the Steppenwolf too. It cannot be denied that he was generally very unhappy; and he could
make others unhappy also, that is, when he loved them or they him. For all who got to love him,
saw always only the one side in him. Many loved him as a refined and clever and interesting
man, and were horrified and disappointed when they had come upon the wolf in him. And they
had to because Harry wished, as every sentient being does, to be loved as a whole and therefore
it was just with those whose love he most valued that he could least of all conceal and belie the
wolf. There were those, however, who loved precisely the wolf in him, the free, the savage, the
untamable, the dangerous and strong, and these found it peculiarly disappointing and deplorable
when suddenly the wild and wicked wolf was also a man, and had hankerings after goodness and
refinement, and wanted to hear Mozart, to read poetry and to cherish human ideals. Usually these
were the most disappointed and angry of all; and so it was that the Steppenwolf brought his own
dual and divided nature into the destinies of others besides himself whenever he came into
contact with them.
Now, whoever thinks that he knows the Steppenwolf and that he can imagine to himself his
lamentably divided life is nevertheless in error. He does not know all by a long way. He does not
know that, as there is no rule without an exception and as one sinner may under certain
circumstances be dearer to God than ninety and nine righteous persons, with Harry too there
were now and then exceptions and strokes of good luck, and that he could breathe and think and
feel sometimes as the wolf, sometimes as the man, clearly and without confusion of the two; and
even on very rare occasions, they made peace and lived for one another in such fashion that not
merely did one keep watch whilst the other slept but each strengthened and confirmed the other.
In the life of this man, too, as well as in all things else in the world, daily use and the accepted
and common knowledge seemed sometimes to have no other aim than to be arrested now and
again for an instant, and broken through, in order to yield the place of honor to the exceptional
and miraculous. Now whether these short and occasional hours of happiness balanced and
alleviated the lot of the Steppenwolf in such a fashion that in the upshot happiness and suffering
held the scales even, or whether perhaps the short but intense happiness of those few hours
outweighed all suffering and left a balance over is again a question over which idle persons may
meditate to their hearts' content. Even the wolf brooded often over this, and those were his idle
and unprofitable days.
In this connection one thing more must be said. There are a good many people of the same
kind as Harry. Many artists are of his kind. These persons all have two souls, two beings within
them. There is God and the devil in them; the mother's blood and the father's; the capacity for
happiness and the capacity for suffering; and in just such a state of enmity and entanglement
towards and within each other as were the wolf and man in Harry. And these men, for whom life
has no repose, live at times in their rare moments of happiness with such strength and
indescribable beauty, the spray of their moment's happiness is flung so high and dazzlingly over
the wide sea of suffering, that the light of it, spreading its radiance, touches others too with its
enchantment. Thus, like a precious, fleeting foam over the sea of suffering arise all those works
of art, in which a single individual lifts himself for an hour so high above his personal destiny
that his happiness shines like a star and appears to all who see it as something eternal and as a
happiness of their own. All these men, whatever their deeds and works may be, have really no
life; that is to say, their lives are not their own and have no form. They are not heroes, artists or
thinkers in the same way that other men are judges, doctors, shoemakers, or schoolmasters. Their
life consists of a perpetual tide, unhappy and torn with pain, terrible and meaningless, unless one
is ready to see its meaning in just those rare experiences, acts, thoughts and works that shine out
above the chaos of such a life. To such men the desperate and horrible thought has come that
perhaps the whole of human life is but a bad joke, a violent and ill-fated abortion of the primal

mother, a savage and dismal catastrophe of nature. To them, too, however, the other thought has
come that man is perhaps not merely a half-rational animal but a child of the gods and destined
to immortality.
Men of every kind have their characteristics, their features, their virtues and vices and their
deadly sins. Prowling about at night was one of the Steppenwolf's favorite tendencies. The
morning was a wretched time of day for him. He feared it and it never brought him any good. On
no morning of his life had he ever been in good spirits nor done any good before midday, nor
ever had a happy idea, nor devised any pleasure for himself or others. By degrees during the
afternoon he warmed and became alive, and only towards evening, on his good days, was he
productive, active and, sometimes, aglow with joy. With this was bound up his need for
loneliness and independence. There was never a man with a deeper and more passionate craving
for independence than he. In his youth when he was poor and had difficulty in earning his bread,
he preferred to go hungry and in torn clothes rather than endanger his narrow limit of
independence. He never sold himself for money or an easy life or to women or to those in power;
and had thrown away a hundred times what in the world's eyes was his advantage and happiness
in order to safeguard his liberty. No prospect was more hateful and distasteful to him than that he
should have to go to an office and conform to daily and yearly routine and obey others. He hated
all kinds of offices, governmental or commercial, as he hated death, and his worst nightmare was
confinement in barracks. He contrived, often at great sacrifice, to avoid all such predicaments. It
was here that his strength and his virtue rested. On this point he could neither be bent nor bribed.
Here his character was firm and indeflectable. Only, through this virtue, he was bound the closer
to his destiny of suffering. It happened to him as it does to all; what he strove for with the
deepest and most stubborn instinct of his being fell to his lot, but more than is good for men. In
the beginning his dream and his happiness, in the end it was his bitter fate. The man of power is
ruined by power, the man of money by money, the submissive man by subservience, the pleasure
seeker by pleasure. He achieved his aim. He was ever more independent. He took orders from no
man and ordered his ways to suit no man. Independently and alone, he decided what to do and to
leave undone. For every strong man attains to that which a genuine impulse bids him seek. But in
the midst of the freedom he had attained Harry suddenly became aware that his freedom was a
death and that he stood alone. The world in an uncanny fashion left him in peace. Other men
concerned him no longer. He was not even concerned about himself. He began to suffocate
slowly in the more and more rarefied atmosphere of remoteness and solitude. For now it was his
wish no longer, nor his aim, to be alone and independent, but rather his lot and his sentence. The
magic wish had been fulfilled and could not be cancelled, and it was no good now to open his
arms with longing and goodwill to welcome the bonds of society. People left him alone now. It
was not, however, that he was an object of hatred and repugnance. On the contrary, he had many
friends. A great many people liked him. But it was no more than sympathy and friendliness. He
received invitations, presents, pleasant letters; but no more. No one came near to him. There was
no link left, and no one could have had any part in his life even had anyone wished it. For the air
of lonely men surrounded him now, a still atmosphere in which the world around him slipped
away, leaving him incapable of relationship, an atmosphere against which neither will nor
longing availed. This was one of the significant earmarks of his life.
Another was that he was numbered among the suicides. And here it must be said that to call
suicides only those who actually destroy themselves is false. Among these, indeed, there are
many who in a sense are suicides only by accident and in whose being suicide has no necessary
place. Among the common run of men there are many of little personality and stamped with no
deep impress of fate, who find their end in suicide without belonging on that account to the type
of the suicide by inclination; while on the other hand, of those who are to be counted as suicides
by the very nature of their beings are many, perhaps a majority, who never in fact lay hands on
themselves. The "suicide," and Harry was one, need not necessarily live in a peculiarly close
relationship to death. One may do this without being a suicide. What is peculiar to the suicide is

that his ego, rightly or wrongly, is felt to be an extremely dangerous, dubious, and doomed germ
of nature; that he is always in his own eyes exposed to an extraordinary risk, as though he stood
with the slightest foothold on the peak of a crag whence a slight push from without or an instant's
weakness from within suffices to precipitate him into the void. The line of fate in the case of
these men is marked by the belief they have that suicide is their most probable manner of death.
It might be presumed that such temperaments, which usually manifest themselves in early youth
and persist through life, show a singular defect of vital force. On the contrary, among the
"suicides" are to be found unusually tenacious and eager and also hardy natures. But just as there
are those who at the least indisposition develop a fever, so do those whom we call suicides, and
who are always very emotional and sensitive, develop at the least shock the notion of suicide.
Had we a science with the courage and authority to concern itself with mankind, instead of with
the mechanism merely of vital phenomena, had we something of the nature of an anthropology,
or a psychology, these matters of fact would be familiar to every one.
What was said above on the subject of suicides touches obviously nothing but the surface. It
is psychology, and, therefore, partly physics. Metaphysically considered, the matter has a
different and a much clearer aspect. In this aspect suicides present themselves as those who are
overtaken by the sense of guilt inherent in individuals, these souls that find the aim of life not in
the perfecting and molding of the self, but in liberating themselves by going back to the mother,
back to God, back to the all. Many of these natures are wholly incapable of ever having recourse
to real suicide, because they have a profound consciousness of the sin of doing so. For us they
are suicides nonetheless; for they see death and not life as the releaser. They are ready to cast
themselves away in surrender, to be extinguished and to go back to the beginning.
As every strength may become a weakness (and under some circumstances must) so, on the
contrary, may the typical suicide find a strength and a support in his apparent weakness. Indeed,
he does so more often than not. The case of Harry, the Steppenwolf, is one of these. As
thousands of his like do, he found consolation and support, and not merely the melancholy play
of youthful fancy, in the idea that the way to death was open to him at any moment. It is true that
with him, as with all men of his kind, every shock, every pain, every untoward predicament at
once called forth the wish to find an escape in death. By degrees, however, he fashioned for
himself out of this tendency a philosophy that was actually serviceable to life. He gained strength
through familiarity with the thought that the emergency exit stood always open, and became
curious, too, to taste his suffering to the dregs. If it went too badly with him he could feel
sometimes with a grim malicious pleasure: "I am curious to see all the same just how much a
man can endure. If the limit of what is bearable is reached, I have only to open the door to
escape." There are a great many suicides to whom this thought imparts an uncommon strength.
On the other hand, all suicides have the responsibility of fighting against the temptation of
suicide. Every one of them knows very well in some corner of his soul that suicide, though a way
out, is rather a mean and shabby one, and that it is nobler and finer to be conquered by life than
to fall by one's own hand. Knowing this, with a morbid conscience whose source is much the
same as that of the militant conscience of so-called self-contented persons, the majority of
suicides are left to a protracted struggle against their temptation. They struggle as the
kleptomaniac against his own vice. The Steppenwolf was not unfamiliar with this struggle. He
had engaged in it with many a change of weapons. Finally, at the age of forty-seven or
thereabouts, a happy and not unhumorous idea came to him from which he often derived some
amusement. He appointed his fiftieth birthday as the day on which he might allow himself to
take his own life. On this day, according to his mood, so he agreed with himself, it should be
open to him to employ the emergency exit or not. Let happen to him what might, illness, poverty,
suffering and bitterness, there was a time-limit. It could not extend beyond these few years,
months, days whose number daily diminished. And in fact he bore much adversity, which
previously would have cost him severer and longer tortures and shaken him perhaps to the roots
of his being, very much more easily. When for any reason it went particularly badly with him,

when peculiar pains and penalties were added to the desolateness and loneliness and savagery of
his life, he could say to his tormentors: "Only wait, two years and I am your master." And with
this he cherished the thought of the morning of his fiftieth birthday. Letters of congratulation
would arrive, while he, relying on his razor, took leave of all his pains and closed the door
behind him. Then gout in the joints, depression of spirits, and all pains of head and body could
look for another victim.

It still remains to elucidate the Steppenwolf as an isolated phenomenon, in his relation, for
example, to the bourgeois world, so that his symptoms may be traced to their source. Let us take
as a starting point, since it offers itself, his relation to the bourgeoisie.
To take his own view of the matter, the Steppenwolf stood entirely outside the world of
convention, since he had neither family life nor social ambitions. He felt himself to be single and
alone, whether as a queer fellow and a hermit in poor health, or as a person removed from the
common run of men by the prerogative of talents that had something of genius in them.
Deliberately, he looked down upon the ordinary man and was proud that he was not one.
Nevertheless his life in many aspects was thoroughly ordinary. He had money in the bank and
supported poor relations. He was dressed respectably and inconspicuously, even though without
particular care. He was glad to live on good terms with the police and the tax collectors and other
such powers. Besides this, he was secretly and persistently attracted to the little bourgeois world,
to those quiet and respectable homes with tidy gardens, irreproachable stair-cases and their
whole modest air of order and comfort. It pleased him to set himself outside it, with his little
vices and extravagances, as a queer fellow or a genius, but he never had his domicile in those
provinces of life where the bourgeoisie had ceased to exist. He was not at ease with violent and
exceptional persons or with criminals and outlaws, and he took up his abode always among the
middle classes, with whose habits and standards and atmosphere he stood in a constant relation,
even though it might be one of contrast and revolt. Moreover, he had been brought up in a
provincial and conventional home and many of the notions and much of the examples of those
days had never left him. In theory he had nothing whatever against the servant class, yet in
practice it would have been beyond him to take a servant quite seriously as his equal. He was
capable of loving the political criminal, the revolutionary or intellectual seducer, the outlaw of
state and society, as his brother, but as for theft and robbery, murder and rape, be would not have
known how to deplore them otherwise than in a thoroughly bourgeois manner.
In this way he was always recognising and affirming with one half of himself, in thought and
act, what with the other half he fought against and denied. Brought up, as he was, in a cultivated
home in the approved manner, he never tore part of his soul loose from its conventionalities even
after he had long since individualised himself to a degree beyond its scope and freed himself
from the substance of its ideals and beliefs.
Now what we call "bourgeois," when regarded as an element always to be found in human
life, is nothing else than the search for a balance. It is the striving after a mean between the
countless extremes and opposites that arise in human conduct. If we take any one of these
coupled opposites, such as piety and profligacy, the analogy is immediately comprehensible. It is
open to a man to give himself up wholly to spiritual views, to seeking after God, to the ideal of
saintliness. On the other hand, he can equally give himself up entirely to the life of instinct, to
the lusts of the flesh, and so direct all his efforts to the attainment of momentary pleasures. The
one path leads to the saint, to the martyrdom of the spirit and surrender to God. The other path
leads to the profligate, to the martyrdom of the flesh, the surrender to corruption. Now it is
between the two, in the middle of the road, that the bourgeois seeks to walk. He will never
surrender himself either to lust or to asceticism. He will never be a martyr or agree to his own
destruction. On the contrary, his ideal is not to give up but to maintain his own identity. He

strives neither for the saintly nor its opposite. The absolute is his abhorrence. He may be ready to
serve God, but not by giving up the fleshpots. He is ready to be virtuous, but likes to be easy and
comfortable in this world as well. In short, his aim is to make a home for himself between two
extremes in a temperate zone without violent storms and tempests; and in this he succeeds
though it be at the cost of that intensity of life and feeling which an extreme life affords. A man
cannot live intensely except at the cost of the self. Now the bourgeois treasures nothing more
highly than the self (rudimentary as his may be). And so at the cost of intensity he achieves his
own preservation and security. His harvest is a quiet mind which he prefers to being possessed
by God, as he does comfort to pleasure, convenience to liberty, and a pleasant temperature to that
deathly inner consuming fire. The bourgeois is consequently by nature a creature of weak
impulses, anxious, fearful of giving himself away and easy to rule. Therefore, he has substituted
majority for power, law for force, and the polling booth for responsibility.
It is clear that this weak and anxious being, in whatever numbers he exists, cannot maintain
himself, and that qualities such as his can play no other role in the world than that of a herd of
sheep among free roving wolves. Yet we see that, though in times when commanding natures are
uppermost, the bourgeois goes at once to the wall, he never goes under; indeed at times he even
appears to rule the world. How is this possible? Neither the great numbers of the herd, nor virtue,
nor common sense, nor organization could avail to save it from destruction. No medicine in the
world can keep a pulse beating that from the outset was so weak. Nevertheless the bourgeoisie
prospers. Why?
The answer runs: Because of the Steppenwolves. In fact, the vital force of the bourgeoisie
resides by no means in the qualities of its normal members, but in those of its extremely
numerous "outsiders" who by virtue of the extensiveness and elasticity of its ideals it can
embrace. There is always a large number of strong and wild natures who share the life of the
fold. Our Steppenwolf, Harry, is a characteristic example. He who is developed far beyond the
level possible to the bourgeois, he who knows the bliss of meditation no less than the gloomy
joys of hatred and self-hatred, he who despises law, virtue and common sense, is nevertheless
captive to the bourgeoisie and cannot escape it. And so all through the mass of the real
bourgeoisie are interposed numerous layers of humanity, many thousands of lives and minds,
every one of whom, it is true, would have outgrown it and have obeyed the call to unconditioned
life, were they not fastened to it by sentiments of their childhood and infected for the most part
with its less intense life; and so they are kept lingering, obedient and bound by obligation and
service. For with the bourgeoisie the opposite of the formula for the great is true: He who is not
against me is with me.
If we now pause to test the soul of the Steppenwolf, we find him distinct from the bourgeois
in the higher development of his individuality—for all extreme individuation turns against itself,
intent upon its own destruction. We see that he had in him strong impulses both to be a saint and
a profligate; and yet he could not, owing to some weakness or inertia, make the plunge into the
untrammelled realms of space. The parent constellation of the bourgeoisie binds him with its
spell. This is his place in the universe and this his bondage. Most intellectuals and most artists
belong to the same type. Only the strongest of them force their way through the atmosphere of
the bourgeois earth and attain to the cosmic. The others all resign themselves or make
compromises. Despising the bourgeoisie, and yet belonging to it, they add to its strength and
glory; for in the last resort they have to share their beliefs in order to live. The lives of these
infinitely numerous persons make no claim to the tragic; but they live under an evil star in a
quite considerable affliction; and in this hell their talents ripen and bear fruit. The few who break
free seek their reward in the unconditioned and go down in splendor. They wear the thorn crown
and their number is small. The others, however, who remain in the fold and from whose talents
the bourgeoisie reaps much gain, have a third kingdom left open to them, an imaginary and yet a
sovereign world, humor. The lone wolves who know no peace, these victims of unceasing pain
to whom the urge for tragedy has been denied and who can never break through the starry space,

who feel themselves summoned thither and yet cannot survive in its atmosphere—for them is
reserved, provided suffering has made their spirits tough and elastic enough, a way of
reconcilement and an escape into humor. Humor has always something bourgeois in it, although
the true bourgeois is incapable of understanding it. In its imaginary realm the intricate and manyfaceted ideal of all Steppenwolves finds its realisation. Here it is possible not only to extol the
saint and the profligate in one breath and to make the poles meet, but to include the bourgeois,
too, in the same affirmation. Now it is possible to be possessed by God and to affirm the sinner,
and vice versa, but it is not possible for either saint or sinner (or for any other of the
unconditioned) to affirm as well that lukewarm mean, the bourgeois. Humor alone, that
magnificent discovery of those who are cut short in their calling to highest endeavor, those who
falling short of tragedy are yet as rich in gifts as in affliction, humor alone (perhaps the most
inborn and brilliant achievement of the spirit) attains to the impossible and brings every aspect of
human existence within the rays of its prism. To live in the world as though it were not the
world, to respect the law and yet to stand above it, to have possessions as though "one possessed
nothing," to renounce as though it were no renunciation, all these favorite and often formulated
propositions of an exalted worldly wisdom, it is in the power of humor alone to make
efficacious.
And supposing the Steppenwolf were to succeed, and he has gifts and resources in plenty, in
decocting this magic draught in the sultry mazes of his hell, his rescue would be assured. Yet
there is much lacking. The possibility, the hope only are there. Whoever loves him and takes his
part may wish him this rescue. It would, it is true, keep him forever tied to the bourgeois world,
but his suffering would be bearable and productive. His relation to the bourgeois world would
lose its sentimentality both in its love and in its hatred, and his bondage to it would cease to
cause him the continual torture of shame.
To attain to this, or, perhaps it may be, to be able at least to dare the leap into the unknown, a
Steppenwolf must once have a good look at himself. He must look deeply into the chaos of his
own soul and plumb its depths. The riddle of his existence would then be revealed to him at once
in all its changelessness, and it would be impossible for him ever after to escape first from the
hell of the flesh to the comforts of a sentimental philosophy and then back to the blind orgy of
his wolfishness. Man and wolf would then be compelled to recognise one another without the
masks of false feeling and to look one another straight in the eye. Then they would either
explode and separate forever, and there would be no more Steppenwolf, or else they would come
to terms in the dawning light of humor.
It is possible that Harry will one day be led to this latter alternative. It is possible that he will
learn one day to know himself. He may get hold of one of our little mirrors. He may encounter
the Immortals. He may find in one of our magic theaters the very thing that is needed to free his
neglected soul. A thousand such possibilities await him. His fate brings them on, leaving him no
choice; for those outside of the bourgeoisie live in the atmosphere of these magic possibilities. A
mere nothing suffices—and the lightning strikes.
And all this is very well known to the Steppenwolf, even though his eye may never fall on
this fragment of his inner biography. He has a suspicion of his allotted place in the world, a
suspicion of the Immortals, a suspicion that he may meet himself face to face; and he is aware of
the existence of that mirror in which he has such bitter need to look and from which he shrinks in
such deathly fear.
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

For the close of our study there is left one last fiction, a fundamental delusion to make clear.
All interpretation, all psychology, all attempts to make things comprehensible, require the
medium of theories, mythologies and lies; and a self-respecting author should not omit, at the
close of an exposition, to dissipate these lies so far as may be in his power. If I say "above" or

"below," that is already a statement that requires explanation, since an above and a below exist
only in thought, only as abstractions. The world itself knows nothing of above or below.
So too, to come to the point, is the Steppenwolf a fiction. When Harry feels himself to be a
were-wolf, and chooses to consist of two hostile and opposed beings, he is merely availing
himself of a mythological simplification. He is no were-wolf at all, and if we appeared to accept
without scrutiny this lie which he invented for himself and believes in, and tried to regard him
literally as a two-fold being and a Steppenwolf, and so designated him, it was merely in the hope
of being more easily understood with the assistance of a delusion, which we must now endeavor
to put in its true light.
The division into wolf and man, flesh and spirit, by means of which Harry tries to make his
destiny more comprehensible to himself is a very great simplification. It is a forcing of the truth
to suit a plausible, but erroneous, explanation of that contradiction which this man discovers in
himself and which appears to himself to be the source of his by no means negligible sufferings.
Harry finds in himself a human being, that is to say, a world of thoughts and feelings, of culture
and tamed or sublimated nature, and besides this he finds within himself also a wolf, that is to
say, a dark world of instinct, of savagery and cruelty, of unsublimated or raw nature. In spite of
this apparently clear division of his being between two spheres, hostile to one another, he has
known happy moments now and then when the man and the wolf for a short while were
reconciled with one another. Suppose that Harry tried to ascertain in any single moment of his
life, any single act, what part the man had in it and what part the wolf, he would find himself at
once in a dilemma, and his whole beautiful wolf-theory would go to pieces. For there is not a
single human being, not even the primitive Negro, not even the idiot, who is so conveniently
simple that his being can be explained as the sum of two or three principal elements; and to
explain so complex a man as Harry by the artless division into wolf and man is a hopelessly
childish attempt. Harry consists of a hundred or a thousand selves, not of two. His life oscillates,
as everyone's does, not merely between two poles, such as the body and the spirit, the saint and
the sinner, but between thousand and thousands.
We need not be surprised that even so intelligent and educated a man as Harry should take
himself for a Steppenwolf and reduce the rich and complex organism of his life to a formula so
simple, so rudimentary and primitive. Man is not capable of thought in any high degree, and
even the most spiritual and highly cultivated of men habitually sees the world and himself
through the lenses of delusive formulas and artless simplifications—and most of all himself. For
it appears to be an inborn and imperative need of all men to regard the self as a unit. However
often and however grievously this illusion is shattered, it always mends again. The judge who
sits over the murderer and looks into his face, and at one moment recognizes all the emotions
and potentialities and possibilities of the murderer in his own soul and hears the murderer's voice
as his own, is at the next moment one and indivisible as the judge, and scuttles back into the shell
of his cultivated self and does his duty and condemns the murderer to death. And if ever the
suspicion of their manifold being dawns upon men of unusual powers and of unusually delicate
perceptions, so that, as all genius must, they break through the illusion of the unity of the
personality and perceive that the self is made up of a bundle of selves, they have only to say so
and at once the majority puts them under lock and key, calls science to aid, establishes
schizomania and protects humanity from the necessity of hearing the cry of truth from the lips of
these unfortunate persons. Why then waste words, why utter a thing that every thinking man
accepts as self-evident, when the mere utterance of it is a breach of taste? A man, therefore, who
gets so far as making the supposed unity of the self two-fold is already almost a genius, in any
case a most exceptional and interesting person. In reality, however, every ego, so far from being
a unity is in the highest degree a manifold world, a constellated heaven, a chaos of forms, of
states and stages, of inheritances and potentialities. It appears to be a necessity as imperative as
eating and breathing for everyone to be forced to regard this chaos as a unity and to speak of his
ego as though it were a one-fold and clearly detached and fixed phenomenon. Even the best of us

shares the delusion.
The delusion rests simply upon a false analogy. As a body everyone is single, as a soul never.
In literature, too, even in its ultimate achievement, we find this customary concern with
apparently whole and single personalities. Of all literature up to our days the drama has been the
most highly prized by writers and critics, and rightly, since it offers (or might offer) the greatest
possibilities of representing the ego as a manifold entity, but for the optical illusion which makes
us believe that the characters of the play are one-fold entities by lodging each one in an
undeniable body, singly, separately and once and for all. An artless esthetic criticism, then, keeps
its highest praise for this so-called character-drama in which each character makes his
appearance unmistakably as a separate and single entity. Only from afar and by degrees the
suspicion dawns here and there that all this is perhaps a cheap and superficial esthetic
philosophy, and that we make a mistake in attributing to our great dramatists those magnificent
conceptions of beauty that come to us from antiquity. These conceptions are not native to us, but
are merely picked up at second hand, and it is in them, with their common source in the visible
body, that the origin of the fiction of an ego, an individual, is really to be found. There is no trace
of such a notion in the poems of ancient India. The heroes of the epics of India are not
individuals, but whole reels of individualities in a series of incarnations. And in modern times
there are poems, in which, behind the veil of a concern with individuality and character that is
scarcely, indeed, in the author's mind, the motive is to present a manifold activity of soul.
Whoever wishes to recognize this must resolve once and for all not to regard the characters of
such a poem as separate beings, but as the various facets and aspects of a higher unity, in my
opinion, of the poet's soul. If "Faust" is treated in this way, Faust, Mephistopheles, Wagner and
the rest form a unity and a supreme individuality; and it is in this higher unity alone, not in the
several characters, that something of the true nature of the soul is revealed. When Faust, in a line
immortalized among schoolmasters and greeted with a shudder of astonishment by the Philistine,
says: "Two souls, alas, do dwell within my breast!" he has forgotten Mephisto and a whole
crowd of other souls that he has in his breast likewise. The Steppenwolf, too, believes that he
bears two souls (wolf and man) in his breast and even so finds his breast disagreeably cramped
because of them. The breast and the body are indeed one, but the souls that dwell in it are not
two, nor five, but countless in number. Man is an onion made up of a hundred integuments, a
texture made up of many threads. The ancient Asiatics knew this well enough, and in the
Buddhist Yoga an exact technique was devised for unmasking the illusion of the personality. The
human merry-go-round sees many changes: the illusion that cost India the efforts of thousands of
years to unmask is the same illusion that the West has labored just as hard to maintain and
strengthen.
If we consider the Steppenwolf from this standpoint it will be clear to us why he suffered so
much under his ludicrous dual personality. He believes, like Faust, that two souls are far too
many for a single breast and must tear the breast asunder. They are on the contrary far too few,
and Harry does shocking violence to his poor soul when he endeavors to apprehend it by means
of so primitive an image. Although he is a most cultivated person, he proceeds like a savage that
cannot count further than two. He calls himself part wolf, part man, and with that he thinks .he
has come to an end and exhausted the matter. With the "man" he packs in everything spiritual
and sublimated or even cultivated to be found in himself, and with the wolf all that is instinctive,
savage and chaotic. But things are not so simple in life as in our thoughts, nor so rough and ready
as in our poor idiotic language; and Harry lies about himself twice over when he employs this
niggardly wolf-theory. He assigns, we fear, whole provinces of his soul to the "man" which are a
long way from being human, and parts of his being to the wolf that long ago have left the wolf
behind.
Like all men Harry believes that he knows very well what man is and yet does not know at all,
although in dreams and other states not subject to control he often has his suspicions. If only he
might not forget them, but keep them, as far as possible at least, for his own. Man is not by any

means of fixed and enduring form (this, in spite of suspicions to the contrary on the part of their
wise men, was the ideal of the ancients). He is much more an experiment and a transition. He is
nothing else than the narrow and perilous bridge between nature and spirit. His innermost destiny
drives him on to the spirit and to God. His innermost longing draws him back to nature, the
mother. Between the two forces his life hangs tremulous and irresolute. "Man," whatever people
think of him, is never anything more than a temporary bourgeois compromise. Convention
rejects and bans certain of the more naked instincts, a little consciousness, morality and
debestialization is called for, and a modicum of spirit is not only permitted but even thought
necessary. The "man" of this concordat, like every other bourgeois ideal, is a compromise, a
timid and artlessly sly experiment, with the aim of cheating both the angry primal mother Nature
and the troublesome primal father Spirit of their pressing claims, and of living in a temperate
zone between the two of them. For this reason the bourgeois today burns as heretics and hangs as
criminals those to whom he erects monuments tomorrow.
That man is not yet a finished creation but rather a challenge of the spirit; a distant possibility
dreaded as much as it is desired; that the way towards it has only been covered for a very short
distance and with terrible agonies and ecstasies even by those few for whom it is the scaffold
today and the monument tomorrow—all this the Steppenwolf, too, suspected. What, however, he
calls the "man" in himself, as opposed to the wolf, is to a great extent nothing else than this very
same average man of the bourgeois convention.
As for the way to true manhood, the way to the immortals, he has, it is true, an inkling of it
and starts upon it now and then for a few hesitating steps and pays for them with much suffering
and many pangs of loneliness. But as for striving with assurance, in response to that supreme
demand, towards the genuine manhood of the spirit, and going the one narrow way to
immortality, he is deeply afraid of it. He knows too well that it leads to still greater sufferings, to
proscription, to the last renunciation, perhaps to the scaffold, and even though the enticement of
immortality lies at the journey's end, he is still unwilling to suffer all these sufferings and to die
all these deaths. Though the goal of manhood is better known to him than to the bourgeois, still
he shuts his eyes. He is resolved to forget that the desperate clinging to the self and the desperate
clinging to life are the surest way to eternal death, while the power to die, to strip one's self
naked, and the eternal surrender of the self bring immortality with them. When he worships his
favorites among the immortals, Mozart, perchance, he always looks at him in the long run
through bourgeois eyes. His tendency is to explain Mozart's perfected being, just as a
schoolmaster would, as a supreme and special gift rather than as the outcome of his immense
powers of surrender and suffering, of his indifference to the ideals of the bourgeois, and of his
patience under that last extremity of loneliness which rarefies the atmosphere of the bourgeois
world to an ice-cold ether, around those who suffer to become men, that loneliness of the Garden
of Gethsemane.
This Steppenwolf of ours has always been aware of at least the Faustian two-fold nature
within him. He has discovered that the one-fold of the body is not inhabited by a one-fold of the
soul, and that at best he is only at the beginning of a long pilgrimage towards this ideal harmony.
He would like either to overcome the wolf and become wholly man or to renounce mankind and
at last to live wholly a wolf's life. It may be presumed that he has never carefully watched a real
wolf. Had he done so he would have seen, perhaps, that even animals are not undivided in spirit.
With them, too, the well-knit beauty of the body hides a being of manifold states and strivings.
The wolf, too, has his abysses. The wolf, too, suffers. No, back to nature is a false track that
leads nowhere but to suffering and despair. Harry can never turn back again and become wholly
wolf, and could he do so he would find that even the wolf is not of primeval simplicity, but
already a creature of manifold complexity. Even the wolf has two, and more than two, souls in
his wolf's breast, and he who desires to be a wolf falls into the same forgetfulness as the man
who sings: "If I could be a child once more!" He who sentimentally sings of blessed childhood is
thinking of the return to nature and innocence and the origin of things, and has quite forgotten

that these blessed children are beset with conflict and complexities and capable of all suffering.
There is, in fact, no way back either to the wolf or to the child. From the very start there is no
innocence and no singleness. Every created thing, even the simplest, is already guilty, already
multiple. It has been thrown into the muddy stream of being and may never more swim back
again to its source. The way to innocence, to the uncreated and to God leads on, not back, not
back to the wolf or to the child, but ever further into sin, ever deeper into human life. Nor will
suicide really solve your problem, unhappy Steppenwolf. You will, instead, embark on the
longer and wearier and harder road of life. You will have to multiply many times your two-fold
being and complicate your complexities still further. Instead of narrowing your world and
simplifying your soul, you will have to absorb more and more of the world and at last take all of
it up in your painfully expanded soul, if you are ever to find peace. This is the road that Buddha
and every great man has gone, whether consciously or not, insofar as fortune favored his quest.
All births mean separation from the All, the confinement within limitation, the separation from
God, the pangs of being born ever anew. The return into the All, the dissolution of painful
individuation, the reunion with God means the expansion of the soul until it is able once more to
embrace the All.
We are not dealing here with man as he is known to economics and statistics, as he is seen
thronging the streets by the million, and of whom no more account can be made than of the sand
of the sea or the spray of its waves. We are not concerned with the few millions less or more.
They are a stock-in-trade, nothing else. No, we are speaking of man in the highest sense, of the
end of the long road to true manhood, of kingly men, of the immortals. Genius is not so rare as
we sometimes think; nor, certainly, so frequent as may appear from history books or, indeed,
from the newspapers. Harry has, we should say, genius enough to attempt the quest of true
manhood instead of discoursing pitifully about his stupid Steppenwolf at every difficulty
encountered.
It is as much a matter for surprise and sorrow that men of such possibilities should fall back
on Steppenwolves and "Two souls, alas!" as that they reveal so often that pitiful love for the
bourgeoisie. A man who can understand Buddha and has an intuition of the heaven and hell of
humanity ought not to live in a world ruled by "common sense" and democracy and bourgeois
standards. It is only from cowardice that he lives in it; and when its dimensions are too cramping
for him and the bourgeois parlor too confining, he lays it at the wolf's door, and refuses to see
that the wolf is as often as not the best part of him. All that is wild in himself he calls wolf and
considers it wicked and dangerous and the bugbear of all decent life. He cannot see, even though
he thinks himself an artist and possessed of delicate perceptions, that a great deal else exists in
him besides and behind the wolf. He cannot see that not all that bites is wolf and that fox,
dragon, tiger, ape and bird of paradise are there also. And he cannot see that this whole world,
this Eden and its manifestations of beauty and terror, of greatness and meanness, of strength and
tenderness is crushed and imprisoned by the wolf legend just as the real man in him is crushed
and imprisoned by that sham existence, the bourgeois.
Man designs for himself a garden with a hundred kinds of trees, a thousand kinds of flowers,
a hundred kinds of fruit and vegetables. Suppose, then, that the gardener of this garden knew no
other distinction than between edible and inedible, nine-tenths of this garden would be useless to
him. He would pull up the most enchanting flowers and hew down the noblest trees and even
regard them with a loathing and envious eye. This is what the Steppenwolf does with the
thousand flowers of his soul. What does not stand classified as either man or wolf he does not
see at all. And consider all that he imputes to "man"! All that is cowardly and apish, stupid and
mean—while to the wolf, only because he has not succeeded in making himself its master, is set
down all that is strong and noble.
Now we bid Harry good-bye and leave him to go on his way alone. Were he already among
the immortals—were he already there at the goal to which his difficult path seems to be taking
him, with what amazement he would look back to all this coming and going, all this indecision

and wild zig-zag trail. With what a mixture of encouragement and blame, pity and joy, he would
smile at this Steppenwolf.

When I had read to the end it came to my mind that some weeks before I had written one
night a rather peculiar poem, likewise about the Steppenwolf. I looked for it in the pile of papers
on my cluttered writing table, found it, and read:
The Wolf trots to and fro,
The world lies deep in snow,
The raven from the birch tree flies,
But nowhere a hare, nowhere a roe,
The roe—she is so dear, so sweet—
If such a thing I might surprise
In my embrace, my teeth would meet,
What else is there beneath the skies?
The lovely creature I would so treasure,
And feast myself deep on her tender thigh,
I would drink of her red blood full measure,
Then howl till the night went by.
Even a hare I would not despise;
Sweet enough its warm flesh in the night.
Is everything to be denied
That could make life a little bright?
The hair on my brush is getting grey.
The sight is failing from my eyes.
Years ago my dear mate died.
And now I trot and dream of a roe.
I trot and dream of a hare.
I hear the wind of midnight howl.
I cool with the snow my burning jowl,
And on to the devil my wretched soul I bear.
So now I had two portraits of myself before me, one a self-portrait in doggerel verse, as sad
and sorry as myself; the other painted with the air of a lofty impartiality by one who stood
outside and who knew more and yet less of me than I did myself. And both these pictures of
myself, my dispirited and halting poem and the clever study by an unknown hand, equally
afflicted me. Both were right. Both gave the unvarnished truth about my shiftless existence. Both
showed clearly how unbearable and untenable my situation was. Death was decreed for this
Steppenwolf. He must with his own hand make an end of his detested existence—unless, molten
in the fire of a renewed self-knowledge, he underwent a change and passed over to a self, new
and undisguised. Alas! this transition was not unknown to me. I had already experienced it
several times, and always in periods of utmost despair. On each occasion of this terribly
uprooting experience, my self, as it then was, was shattered to fragments. Each time deep-seated
powers had shaken and destroyed it; each time there had followed the loss of a cherished and
particularly beloved part of my life that was true to me no more. Once, I had lost my profession
and livelihood. I had had to forfeit the esteem of those who before had touched their caps to me.
Next, my family life fell in ruins over night, when my wife, whose mind was disordered, drove
me from house and home. Love and confidence had changed of a sudden to hate and deadly
enmity and the neighbors saw me go with pitying scorn. It was then that my solitude had its
beginning. Years of hardship and bitterness went by. I had built up the ideal of a new life,

inspired by the asceticism of the intellect. I had attained a certain serenity and elevation of life
once more, submitting myself to the practice of abstract thought and to a rule of austere
meditation. But this mold, too, was broken and lost at one blow all its exalted and noble intent. A
whirl of travel drove me afresh over the earth; fresh sufferings were heaped up, and fresh guilt.
And every occasion when a mask was torn off, an ideal broken, was preceded by this hateful
vacancy and stillness, this deathly constriction and loneliness and unrelatedness, this waste and
empty hell of lovelessness and despair, such as I had now to pass through once more.
It is true that every time my life was shattered in this way I had in the end gained something,
some increase in liberty and in spiritual growth and depth, but with it went an increased
loneliness, an increasing chill of severance and estrangement. Looked at with the bourgeois eye,
my life had been a continuous descent from one shattering to the next that left me more remote at
every step from all that was normal, permissible and healthful. The passing years had stripped
me of my calling, my family, my home. I stood outside all social circles, alone, beloved by none,
mistrusted by many, in unceasing and bitter conflict with public opinion and morality; and
though I lived in a bourgeois setting, I was all the same an utter stranger to this world in all I
thought and felt. Religion, country, family, state, all lost their value and meant nothing to me any
more. The pomposity of the sciences, societies, and arts disgusted me. My views and tastes and
all that I thought, once the shining adornments of a gifted and sought-after person, had run to
seed in neglect and were looked at askance. Granting that I had in the course of all my painful
transmutations made some invisible and unaccountable gain, I had had to pay dearly for it; and at
every turn my life was harsher, more difficult, lonely and perilous. In truth, I had little cause to
wish to continue in that way which led on into ever thinner air, like the smoke in Nietzsche's
harvest song.
Oh, yes, I had experienced all these changes and transmutations that fate reserves for her
difficult children, her ticklish customers. I knew them only too well. I knew them as well as a
zealous but unsuccessful sportsman knows the stands at a shoot; as an old gambler on the
Exchange knows each stage of speculation, the scoop, the weakening market, the break and
bankruptcy. Was I really to live through all this again? All this torture, all this pressing need, all
these glimpses into the paltriness and worthlessness of my own self, the frightful dread lest I
succumb, and the fear of death. Wasn't it better and simpler to prevent a repetition of so many
sufferings and to quit the stage? Certainly, it was simpler and better. Whatever the truth of all
that was said in the little book on the Steppenwolf about "suicides," no one could forbid me the
satisfaction of invoking the aid of coal gas or a razor or revolver, and so sparing myself this
repetition of a process whose bitter agony I had had to drink often enough, surely, and to the
dregs. No, in all conscience, there was no power in the world that could prevail with me to go
through the mortal terror of another encounter with myself, to face another reorganisation, a new
incarnation, when at the end of the road there was no peace or quiet—but forever destroying the
self, in order to renew the self. Let suicide be as stupid, cowardly, shabby as you please, call it an
infamous and ignominious escape; still, any escape, even the most ignominious, from this
treadmill of suffering was the only thing to wish for. No stage was left for the noble and heroic
heart. Nothing was left but the simple choice between a slight and swift pang and an unthinkable,
a devouring and endless suffering. I had played Don Quixote often enough in my difficult,
crazed life, had put honor before comfort, and heroism before reason. There was an end of it!
Daylight was dawning through the window panes, the leaden, infernal daylight of a rainy
winter's day, when at last I got to bed. I took my resolution to bed with me. At the very last,
however, on the last verge of consciousness in the moment of falling asleep, the remarkable
passage in the Steppenwolf pamphlet which deals with the immortals flashed through me. With it
came the enchanting recollection that several times, the last quite recently, I had felt near enough
to the immortals to share in one measure of old music their cool, bright, austere and yet smiling
wisdom. The memory of it soared, shone out, then died away; and heavy as a mountain, sleep
descended on my brain.

I woke about midday, and at once the situation, as I had disentangled it, came back to me.
There lay the little book on my night stand, and my poem. My resolution, too, was there. After
the nights sleep it had taken shape and looked at me out of the confusion of my youth with a
calm and friendly greeting. Haste makes no speed. My resolve to die was not the whim of an
hour. It was the ripe, sound fruit that had grown slowly to full size, lightly rocked by the winds
of fate whose next breath would bring it to the ground.
I had in my medicine chest an excellent means of stilling pain—an unusually strong tincture
of laudanum. I indulged very rarely in it and often refrained from using it for months at a time. I
had recourse to the drug only when physical pain plagued me beyond endurance. Unfortunately,
it was of no use in putting an end to myself. I had proved this some years before. Once when
despair had again got the better of me I had swallowed a big dose of it—enough to kill six men,
and yet it had not killed me. I fell asleep, it is true, and lay for several hours completely
stupefied; but then to my frightful disappointment I was half awakened by violent convulsions of
the stomach and fell asleep once more. It was the middle of the next day when I woke up in
earnest in a state of dismal sobriety. My empty brain was burning and I had almost lost my
memory. Apart from a spell of insomnia and severe pains in the stomach no trace of the poison
was left.
This expedient, then, was no good. But I put my resolution in this way: the next time I felt
that I must have recourse to the opium, I might allow myself to use big means instead of small,
that is, a death of absolute certainty with a bullet or a razor. Then I could be sure. As for waiting
till my fiftieth birthday, as the little book wittily prescribed—this seemed to me much too long a
delay. There were still two years till then. Whether it were a year hence or a month, were it even
the following day, the door stood open.
I cannot say that the resolution altered my life very profoundly. It made me a little more
indifferent to my afflictions, a little freer in the use of opium and wine, a little more inquisitive to
know the limits of endurance, but that was all. The other experiences of that evening had a
stronger after-effect. I read the Steppenwolf treatise through again many times, now submitting
gratefully to an invisible magician because of his wise conduct of my destiny, now with scorn
and contempt for its futility, and the little understanding it showed of my actual disposition and
predicament. All that was written there of Steppenwolves and suicides was very good, no doubt,
and very clever. It might do for the species, the type; but it was too wide a mesh to catch my own
individual soul, my unique and unexampled destiny.
What, however, occupied my thoughts more than all else was the hallucination, or vision, of
the church wall. The announcement made by the dancing illuminated letters promised much that
was hinted at in the treatise, and the voices of that strange world had powerfully aroused my
curiosity. For hours I pondered deeply over them. On these occasions I was more and more
impressed by the warning of that inscription—"Not for everybody!" and "For madmen only!"
Madman, then, I must certainly be and far from the mold of "everybody" if those voices reached
me and that world spoke to me. In heaven's name, had I not long ago been remote from the life
of everybody and from normal thinking and normal existence? Had I not long ago given ample
margin to isolation and madness? All the same, I understood the summons well enough in my
innermost heart. Yes, I understood the invitation to madness and the jettison of reason and the
escape from the clogs of convention in surrender to the unbridled surge of spirit and fantasy.
One day after I had made one more vain search through streets and squares for the man with
the signboard and prowled several times past the wall of the invisible door with watchful eye, I
met a funeral procession in St. Martin's. While I was contemplating the faces of the mourners
who followed the hearse with halting step, I thought to myself, "Where in this town or in the
whole world is the man whose death would be a loss to me? And where is the man to whom my
death would mean anything?" There was Erica, it is true, but for a long while we had lived apart.
We rarely saw one another without quarreling and at the moment I did not even know her
address. She came to see me now and then, or I made the journey to her, and since both of us

were lonely, difficult people related somehow to one another in soul, and sickness of soul, there
was a link between us that held in spite of all. But would she not perhaps breathe more freely if
she heard of my death? I did not know. I did not know either how far my own feeling for her was
to be relied upon. To know anything of such matters one needs to live in a world of practical
possibilities.
Meanwhile, obeying my fancy, I had fallen in at the rear of the funeral procession and jogged
along behind the mourners to the cemetery, an up-to-date set-up all of concrete, complete with
crematorium and what not. The deceased in question was not however to be cremated. His coffin
was set down before a simple hole in the ground, and I saw the clergyman and the other vultures
and functionaries of a burial establishment going through their performances, to which they
endeavored to give all the appearance of great ceremony and sorrow and with such effect that
they outdid themselves and from pure acting they got caught in their own lies and ended by
being comic. I saw how their black professional robes fell in folds, and what pains they took to
work up the company of mourners and to force them to bend the knee before the majesty of
death. It was labor in vain. Nobody wept. The deceased did not appear to have been
indispensable. Nor could anyone be talked into a pious frame of mind; and when the clergyman
addressed the company repeatedly as "dear fellow-Christians," all the silent faces of these shop
people and master bakers and their wives were turned down in embarrassment and expressed
nothing but the wish that this uncomfortable function might soon be over. When the end came,
the two foremost of the fellow-Christians shook the clergyman's hand, scraped the moist clay in
which the dead had been laid from their shoes at the next scraper and without hesitation their
faces again showed their natural expression; and then it was that one of them seemed suddenly
familiar. It was, so it seemed to me, the man who had carried the signboard and thrust the little
book into my hands.
At the moment when I thought I recognized him he stopped and, stooping down, carefully
turned up his black trousers, and then walked away at a smart pace with his umbrella clipped
under his arm. I walked after him, but when I overtook him and gave him a nod, he did not
appear to recognize me.
"Is there no show tonight?" I asked with an attempt at a wink such as two conspirators give
each other. But it was long ago that such pantomime was familiar to me. Indeed, living as I did, I
had almost lost the habit of speech, and I felt myself that I only made a silly grimace.
"Show tonight?" he growled, and looked at me as though he had never set eyes on me before.
"Go to the Black Eagle, man, if that's what you want."
And, in fact, I was no longer certain it was he. I was disappointed and feeling the
disappointment I walked on aimlessly. I had no motives, no incentives to exert myself, no duties.
Life tasted horribly bitter. I felt that the long-standing disgust was coming to a crisis and that life
pushed me out and cast me aside. I walked through the grey streets in a rage and everything
smelt of moist earth and burial. I swore that none of these death-vultures should stand at my
grave, with cassock and sentimental Christian murmurings. Ah, look where I might and think
what I might, there was no cause for rejoicing and nothing beckoned me. There was nothing to
charm me or tempt me. Everything was old, withered, grey, limp and spent, and stank of
staleness and decay. Dear God, how was it possible? How had I, with the wings of youth and
poetry, come to this? Art and travel and the glow of ideals—and now this! How had this
paralysis crept over me so slowly and furtively, this hatred against myself and everybody, this
deep-seated anger and obstruction of all feelings, this filthy hell of emptiness and despair.
Passing by the Library I met a young professor of whom in earlier years I used occasionally to
see a good deal. When I last stayed in the town, some years before, I had even been several times
to his house to talk Oriental mythology, a study in which I was then very much interested. He
came in my direction walking stiffly and with a short-sighted air and only recognized me at the
last moment as I was passing by. In my lamentable state I was half-thankful for the cordiality
with which he threw himself on me. His pleasure in seeing me became quite lively as he recalled

the talks we had had together and assured me that he owed a great deal to the stimulus they had
given him and that he often thought of me. He had rarely had such stimulating and productive
discussions with any colleague since. He asked how long I had been in the town (I lied and said
"a few days") and why I had not looked him up. The learned man held me with his friendly eye
and, though I really found it all ridiculous, I could not help enjoying these crumbs of warmth and
kindliness, and was lapping them up like a starved dog. Harry, the Steppenwolf, was moved to a
grin. Saliva collected in his parched throat and against his will he bowed down to sentiment. Yes,
zealously piling lie upon lie, I said that I was only here in passing, for the purpose of research,
and should of course have paid him a visit but that I had not been feeling very fit. And when he
went on to invite me very heartily to spend the evening with him, I accepted with thanks and sent
my greetings to his wife, until my cheeks fairly ached with the unaccustomed efforts of all these
forced smiles and speeches. And while I, Harry Haller, stood there in the street, flattered and
surprised and studiously polite and smiling into the good fellow's kindly, shortsighted face, there
stood the other Harry, too, at my elbow and grinned likewise. He stood there and grinned as he
thought what a funny, crazy, dishonest fellow I was to show my teeth in rage and curse the
whole world one moment and, the next, to be falling all over myself in the eagerness of my
response to the first amiable greeting of the first good honest fellow who came my way, to be
wallowing like a suckling-pig in the luxury of a little pleasant feeling and friendly esteem. Thus
stood the two Harrys, neither playing a very pretty part, over against the worthy professor,
mocking one another, watching one another, and spitting at one another, while as always in such
predicaments, the eternal question presented itself whether all this was simple stupidity and
human frailty, a common depravity, or whether this sentimental egoism and perversity, this
slovenliness and two-facedness of feeling was merely a personal idiosyncrasy of the
Steppenwolves. And if this nastiness was common to men in general, I could rebound from it
with renewed energy into hatred of all the world, but if it was a personal frailty, it was good
occasion for an orgy of hatred of myself.
While my two selves were thus locked in conflict, the professor was almost forgotten; and
when the oppressiveness of his presence came suddenly back to me, I made haste to be relieved
of it. I looked after him for a long while as he disappeared into the distance along the leafless
avenue with the good-natured and slightly comic gait of an ingenuous idealist. Within me, the
battle raged furiously. Mechanically I bent and unbent my stiffened fingers as though to fight the
ravages of a secret poison, and at the same time had to realize that I had been nicely framed.
Round my neck was the invitation for 8:30, with all its obligations of politeness, of talking shop
and of contemplating another's domestic bliss. And so home—in wrath. Once there, I poured
myself out some brandy and water, swallowed some of my gout pills with it, and, lying on the
sofa, tried to read. No sooner had I succeeded in losing myself for a moment in Sophia's Journey
from Memel to Saxony, a delightful old book of the eighteenth century, than the invitation came
over me of a sudden and reminded me that I was neither shaved nor dressed. Why, in heaven's
name, had I brought all this on myself? Well, get up, so I told myself, lather yourself, scrape
your chin till it bleeds, dress and show an amiable disposition towards your fellow-men. And
while I lathered my face, I thought of that sordid hole in the clay of the cemetery into which
some unknown person had been lowered that day. I thought of the pinched faces of the bored
fellow-Christians and I could not even laugh. There in that sordid hole in the clay, I thought, to
the accompaniment of stupid and insincere ministrations and the no less stupid and insincere
demeanor of the group of mourners, in the discomforting sight of all the metal crosses and
marble slabs and artificial flowers of wire and glass, ended not only that unknown man, and,
tomorrow or the day after, myself as well, buried in the soil with a hypocritical show of
sorrow—no, there and so ended everything; all our striving, all our culture, all our beliefs, all our
joy and pleasure in life—already sick and soon to be buried there too. Our whole civilization was
a cemetery where Jesus Christ and Socrates, Mozart and Haydn, Dante and Goethe were but the
indecipherable names on moldering stones; and the mourners who stood round affecting a

pretence of sorrow would give much to believe in these inscriptions which once were holy, or at
least to utter one heart-felt word of grief and despair about this world that is no more. And
nothing was left them but the embarrassed grimaces of a company round a grave. As I raged on
like this I cut my chin in the usual place and had to apply a caustic to the wound; and even so
there was my clean collar, scarce put on, to change again, and all this for an invitation that did
not give me the slightest pleasure. And yet a part of me began play-acting again, calling the
professor a sympathetic fellow, yearning after a little talk and intercourse with my fellow men,
reminding me of the professor's pretty wife, prompting me to believe that an evening spent with
my pleasant host and hostess would be in reality positively cheering, helping me to clap some
court plaster to my chin, to put on my clothes and tie my tie well, and gently putting me, in fact,
far from my genuine desire of staying at home. Whereupon it occurred to me—so it is with every
one. Just as I dress and go out to visit the professor and exchange a few more or less insincere
compliments with him, without really wanting to at all, so it is with the majority of men day by
day and hour by hour in their daily lives and affairs. Without really wanting to at all, they pay
calls and carry on conversations, sit out their hours at desks and on office chairs; and it is all
compulsory, mechanical and against the grain, and it could all be done or left undone just as well
by machines; and indeed it is this never-ceasing machinery that prevents their being, like me, the
critics of their own lives and recognizing the stupidity and shallowness, the hopeless tragedy and
waste of the lives they lead, and the awful ambiguity grinning over it all. And they are right,
right a thousand times to live as they do, playing their games and pursuing their business, instead
of resisting the dreary machine and staring into the void as I do, who have left the track. Let no
one think that I blame other men, though now and then in these pages I scorn and even deride
them, or that I accuse them of the responsibility of my personal misery. But now that I have
come so far, and standing as I do on the extreme verge of life where the ground falls away before
me into bottomless darkness, I should do wrong and I should lie if I pretended to myself or to
others that that machine still revolved for me and that I was still obedient to the eternal child's
play of that charming world.
On all this the evening before me afforded a remarkable commentary. I paused a moment in
front of the house and looked up at the windows. There he lives, I thought, and carries on his
labors year by year, reads and annotates texts, seeks for analogies between western Asiatic and
Indian mythologies, and it satisfies him, because he believes in the value of it all. He believes in
the studies whose servant he is; he believes in the value of mere knowledge and its acquisition,
because he believes in progress and evolution. He has not been through the war, nor is he
acquainted with the shattering of the foundations of thought by Einstein (that, thinks he, only
concerns the mathematicians). He sees nothing of the preparations for the next war that are going
on all round him. He hates Jews and Communists. He is a good, unthinking, happy child, who
takes himself seriously; and, in fact, he is much to be envied. And so, pulling myself together, I
entered the house. A maid in cap and apron opened the door. Warned by some premonition, I
noticed with care where she laid my hat and coat, and was then shown into a warm and welllighted room and requested to wait. Instead of saying a prayer or taking a nap, I followed a
wayward impulse and picked up the first thing I saw. It chanced to be a small picture in a frame
that stood on the round table leaning back on its paste-board support. It was an engraving and it
represented the poet Goethe as an old man full of character, with a finely chiseled face and a
genius' mane. Neither the renowned fire of his eyes nor the lonely and tragic expression beneath
the courtly whitewash was lacking. To this the artist had given special care, and he had
succeeded in combining the elemental force of the old man with a somewhat professional makeup of self-discipline and righteousness, without prejudice to his profundity; and had made of
him, all in all, a really charming old gentleman, fit to adorn any drawing room. No doubt this
portrait was no worse than others of its description. It was much the same as all those
representations by careful craftsmen of saviors, apostles, heroes, thinkers and statesmen. Perhaps
I found it exasperating only because of a certain pretentious virtuosity. In any case, and whatever

the cause, this empty and self-satisfied presentation of the aged Goethe shrieked at me at once as
a fatal discord, exasperated and oppressed as I was already. It told me that I ought never to have
come. Here fine Old Masters and the Nation's Great Ones were at home, not Steppenwolves.
If only the master of the house had come in now, I might have had the luck to find some
favorable opportunity for finding my way out. As it was, his wife came in, and I surrendered to
fate though I scented danger. We shook hands and to the first discord there succeeded nothing
but new ones. The lady complimented me on my looks, though I knew only too well how sadly
the years had aged me since our last meeting. The clasp of her hand on my gouty fingers had
reminded me of it already. Then she went on to ask after my dear wife, and I had to say that my
wife had left me and that we were divorced. We were glad enough when the professor came in.
He too gave me a hearty welcome and the awkward comedy came to a beautiful climax. He was
holding a newspaper to which he subscribed, an organ of the militarist and jingoist party, and
after shaking hands he pointed to it and commented on a paragraph about a namesake of mine—
a publicist called Haller, a bad fellow and a rotten patriot—who had been making fun of the
Kaiser and expressing the view that his own country was no less responsible for the outbreak of
war than the enemy nations. There was a man for you! The editor had given him his deserts and
put him in the pillory. However, when the professor saw that I was not interested, we passed to
other topics, and the possibility that this horrid fellow might be sitting in front of them did not
even remotely occur to either of them. Yet so it was, I myself was that horrid fellow. Well, why
make a fuss and upset people? I laughed to myself, but gave up all hope now of a pleasant
evening.
I have a clear recollection of the moment when the professor spoke of Haller as a traitor to his
country. It was then that the horrid feeling of depression and despair which had been mounting in
me and growing stronger and stronger ever since the burial scene condensed to a dreary
dejection. It rose to the pitch of a bodily anguish, arousing within me a dread and suffocating
foreboding. I had the feeling that something lay in wait for me, that a danger stalked me from
behind. Fortunately the announcement that dinner was on the table supervened. We went into the
dining room, and while I racked my brains again and again for something harmless to say, I ate
more than I was accustomed to do and felt myself growing more wretched with every moment.
Good heavens, I thought all the while, why do we put ourselves to such exertions? I felt
distinctly that my hosts were not at their ease either and that their liveliness was forced, whether
it was that I had a paralyzing effect on them or because of some other and domestic
embarrassment. There was not a question they put to me that I could answer frankly, and I was
soon fairly entangled in my lies and wrestling with my nausea at every word. At last, for the sake
of changing the subject, I began to tell them of the funeral which I had witnessed earlier in the
day. But I could not hit the right note. My efforts at humor fell entirely flat and we were more
than ever at odds. Within me the Steppenwolf bared his teeth in a grin. By the time we had
reached dessert, silence had descended on all three of us.
We went back to the room we had come from to invoke the aid of coffee and cognac. There,
however, my eye fell once more on the magnate of poetry, although he had been put on a chest
of drawers at one side of the room. Unable to get away from him, I took him once more in my
hands, though warning voices were plainly audible, and proceeded to attack him. I was as though
obsessed by the feeling that the situation was intolerable and that the time had come either to
warm my hosts up, to carry them off their feet and put them in tune with myself, or else to bring
about a final explosion.
"Let us hope," said I, "that Goethe did not really look like this. This conceited air of nobility,
the great man ogling the distinguished company, and beneath the manly exterior what a world of
charming sentimentality! Certainly, there is much to be said against him. I have a good deal
against his venerable pomposity myself. But to represent him like this—no, that is going too far."
The lady of the house finished pouring out the coffee with a deeply wounded expression and
then hurriedly left the room; and her husband explained to me with mingled embarrassment and

reproach that the picture of Goethe belonged to his wife and was one of her dearest possessions.
"And even if, objectively speaking, you are right, though I don't agree with you, you need not
have been so outspoken."
"There you are right," I admitted. "Unfortunately it is a habit, a vice of mine, always to speak
my mind as much as possible, as indeed Goethe did, too, in his better moments. In this chaste
drawing room Goethe would certainly never have allowed himself to use an outrageous, a
genuine and unqualified expression. I sincerely beg your wife's pardon and your own. Tell her,
please, that I am a schizomaniac. And now, if you will allow me, I will take my leave."
To this he made objections in spite of his perplexity. He even went back to the subject of our
former discussions and said once more how interesting and stimulating they had been and how
deep an impression my theories about Mithras and Krishna had made on him at the time. He had
hoped that the present occasion would have been an opportunity to renew these discussions. I
thanked him for speaking as he did. Unfortunately, my interest in Krishna had vanished and also
my pleasure in learned discussions. Further, I had told him several lies that day. For example, I
had been many months in the town, and not a few days, as I had said. I lived, however, quite by
myself, and was no longer fit for decent society; for in the first place, I was nearly always in a
bad temper and afflicted with the gout, and in the second place, usually drunk. Lastly, to make a
clean slate, and not to go away, at least, as a liar, it was my duty to inform him that he had
grievously insulted me that evening. He had endorsed the attitude taken up by a reactionary
paper towards Haller's opinions; a stupid bull-necked paper, fit for an officer on half-pay, not for
a man of learning. This bad fellow and rotten patriot, Haller, however, and myself were one and
the same person, and it would be better for our country and the world in general, if at least the
few people who were capable of thought stood for reason and the love of peace instead of
heading wildly with a blind obsession for a new war. And so I would bid him good-bye.
With that I got up and took leave of Goethe and of the professor. I seized my hat and coat
from the rack outside and left the house. The wolf in me howled in gleeful triumph, and a
dramatic struggle between my two selves followed. For it was at once clear to me that this
disagreeable evening had much more significance for me than for the indignant professor. For
him, it was a disillusionment and a petty outrage. For me, it was a final failure and flight. It was
my leave-taking from the respectable, moral and learned world, and a complete triumph for the
Steppenwolf. I was sent flying and beaten from the field, bankrupt in my own eyes, dismissed
without a shred of credit or a ray of humor to comfort me. I had taken leave of the world in
which I had once found a home, the world of convention and culture, in the manner of the man
with a weak stomach who has given up pork. In a rage I went on my way beneath the street
lamps, in a rage and sick unto death. What a hideous day of shame and wretchedness it had been
from morning to night, from the cemetery to the scene with the professor. For what? And why?
Was there any sense in taking up the burden of more such days as this or of sitting out any more
such suppers? There was not. This very night I would make an end of the comedy, go home and
cut my throat. No more tarrying.
I paced the streets in all directions, driven on by wretchedness. Naturally it was stupid of me
to bespatter the drawing-room ornaments of the worthy folk, stupid and ill-mannered, but I could
not help it; and even now I could not help it. I could not bear this tame, lying, well-mannered life
any longer. And since it appeared that I could not bear my loneliness any longer either, since my
own company had become so unspeakably hateful and nauseous, since I struggled for breath in a
vacuum and suffocated in hell, what way out was left me? There was none. I thought of my
father and mother, of the sacred flame of my youth long extinct, of the thousand joys and labors
and aims of my life. Nothing of them all was left me, not even repentance, nothing but agony and
nausea. Never had the clinging to mere life seemed so grievous as now.
I rested a moment in a tavern in an outlying part of the town and drank some brandy and
water; then to the streets once more, with the devil at my heels, up and down the steep and
winding streets of the Old Town, along the avenues, across the station square. The thought of

going somewhere took me into the station. I scanned the time tables on the walls; drank some
wine and tried to come to my senses. Then the specter that I went in dread of came nearer, till I
saw it plain. It was the dread of returning to my room and coming to a halt there, faced by my
despair. There was no escape from this moment though I walked the streets for hours. Sooner or
later I should be at my door, at the table with my books, on the sofa with the photograph of Erica
above it. Sooner or later the moment would come to take out my razor and cut my throat. More
and more plainly the picture rose before me. More and more plainly, with a wildly beating heart,
I felt the dread of all dreads, the fear of death. Yes, I was horribly afraid of death. Although I
saw no other way out, although nausea, agony and despair threatened to engulf me; although life
had no allurement and nothing to give me either of joy or hope, I shuddered all the same with an
unspeakable horror of a gaping wound in a condemned man's flesh.
I saw no other way of escape from this dreadful specter. Suppose that today cowardice won a
victory over despair, tomorrow and each succeeding day I would again face despair heightened
by self-contempt. It was merely taking up and throwing down the knife till at last it was done.
Better today then. I reasoned with myself as though with a frightened child. But the child would
not listen. It ran away. It wanted to live. I renewed my fitful wanderings through the town,
making many detours not to return to the house which I had always in my mind and always
deferred. Here and there I came to a stop and lingered, drinking a glass or two, and then, as if
pursued, ran around in a circle whose center had the razor as a goal, and meant death. Sometimes
from utter weariness I sat on a bench, on a fountain's rim, or a curbstone and wiped the sweat
from my forehead and listened to the beating of my heart. Then on again in mortal dread and an
intense yearning for life.
Thus it was I found myself late at night in a distant and unfamiliar part of the town; and there
I went into a public house from which there came the lively sound of dance music. Over the
entrance as I went in I read "The Black Eagle" on the old signboard. Within I found it was a free
night—crowds, smoke, the smell of wine, and the clamor of voices, with dancing in a room at
the back, whence issued the frenzy of music. I stayed in the nearer room where there were none
but simple folk, some of them poorly dressed, whereas behind in the dance hall fashionable
people were also to be seen. Carried forward by the crowd, I soon found myself near the bar,
wedged against a table at which sat a pale and pretty girl against the wall. She wore a thin dancefrock cut very low and a withered flower in her hair. She gave me a friendly and observant look
as I came up and with a smile moved to one side to make room for me.
"May I?" I asked and sat down beside her.
"Of course, you may," she said. "But who are you?"
"Thanks," I replied. "I cannot possibly go home, cannot, cannot. I'll stay here with you if
you'll let me. No, I can't go back home."
She nodded as though to humor me, and as she nodded I observed the curl that fell from her
temple to her ear, and I saw that the withered flower was a camellia. From within crashed the
music and at the buffet the waitresses hurriedly shouted their orders.
"Well, stay here then," she said with a voice that comforted me. "Why can't you go home?"
"I can't. There's something waiting for me there. No, I can't—it's too frightful."
"Let it wait then and stay here. First wipe your glasses. You can see nothing like that. Give
me your handkerchief. What shall we drink? Burgundy?"
While she wiped my glasses, I had the first clear impression of her pale, firm face, with its
clear grey eyes and smooth forehead, and the short, tight curl in front of her ear. Good-naturedly
and with a touch of mockery she began to take me in hand. She ordered the wine, and as she
clinked her glass with mine, her eyes fell on my shoes.
"Good Lord, wherever have you come from? You look as though you had come from Paris on
foot. That's no state to come to a dance in."
I answered "yes" and "no," laughed now and then, and let her talk. I found her charming, very
much to my surprise, for I had always avoided girls of her kind and regarded them with

suspicion. And she treated me exactly in the way that was best for me at that moment, and so she
has since without an exception. She took me under her wing just as I needed, and mocked me,
too, just as I needed. She ordered me a sandwich and told me to eat it. She filled my glass and
bade me sip it and not drink too fast. Then she commended my docility.
"That's fine," she said to encourage me. "You're not difficult. I wouldn't mind betting it's a
long while since you have had to obey anyone."
"You'd win the bet. How did you know it?"
"Nothing in that. Obeying is like eating and drinking. There's nothing like it if you've been
without it too long. Isn't it so, you're glad to do as I tell you?"
"Very glad. You know everything."
"You make it easy to. Perhaps, my friend, I could tell you, too, what it is that's waiting for you
at home and what you dread so much. But you know that for yourself. We needn't talk about it,
eh? Silly business! Either a man goes and hangs himself, and then he hangs sure enough, and
he'll have his reasons for it, or else he goes on living and then he has only living to bother
himself with. Simple enough."
"Oh," I cried, "if only it were so simple. I've bothered myself enough with life, God knows,
and little use it has been to me. To hang oneself is hard, perhaps. I don't know. But to live is far,
far harder. God, how hard it is!"
"You'll see it's child's play. We've made a start already. You've polished your glasses, eaten
something and had a drink. Now we'll go and give your shoes and trousers a brush and then
you'll dance a shimmy with me."
"Now that shows," I cried in a fluster, "that I was right! Nothing could grieve me more than
not to be able to carry out any command of yours, but I can dance no shimmy, nor waltz, nor
polka, nor any of the rest of them. I've never danced in my life. Now you can see it isn't all as
easy as you think."
Her bright red lips smiled and she firmly shook her waved and shingled head; and as I looked
at her, I thought I could see a resemblance to Rosa Kreisler, with whom I had been in love as a
boy. But she had a dark complexion and dark hair. I could not tell of whom it was she reminded
me. I knew only that it was of someone in my early youth and boyhood.
"Wait a bit," she cried. "So you can't dance? Not at all? Not even a one step? And yet you talk
of the trouble you've taken to live? You told a fib there, my boy, and you shouldn't do that at
your age. How can you say that you've taken any trouble to live when you won't even dance?"
"But if I can't—I've never learned!"
She laughed.
"But you learned reading and writing and arithmetic, I suppose, and French and Latin and a
lot of other things? I don't mind betting you were ten or twelve years at school and studied
whatever else you could as well. Perhaps you've even got your doctor's degree and know Chinese
or Spanish. Am I right? Very well then. But you couldn't find the time and money for a few
dancing lessons! No, indeed!"
"It was my parents," I said to justify myself. "They let me learn Latin and Greek and all the
rest of it. But they didn't let me learn to dance. It wasn't the thing with us. My parents had never
danced themselves."
She looked at me quite coldly, with real contempt, and again something in her face reminded
me of my youth.
"So your parents must take the blame then. Did you ask them whether you might spend the
evening at the Black Eagle? Did you? They're dead a long while ago, you say? So much for that.
And now supposing you were too obedient to learn to dance when you were young (though I
don't believe you were such a model child), what have you been doing with yourself all these
years?"
"Well," I confessed, "I scarcely know myself—studied, played music, read books, written
books, traveled—"

"Fine views of life, you have. You have always done the difficult and complicated things and
the simple ones you haven't even learned. No time, of course. More amusing things to do. Well,
thank God, I'm not your mother. But to do as you do and then say you've tested life to the bottom
and found nothing in it is going a bit too far."
"Don't scold me," I implored. "It isn't as if I didn't know I was mad."
"Oh, don't make a song of your sufferings. You are no madman, Professor. You're not half
mad enough to please me. It seems to me you're much too clever in a silly way, just like a
professor. Have another roll. You can tell me some more later."
She got another roll for me, put a little salt and mustard on it, cut a piece for herself and told
me to eat it. I did all she told me except dance. It did me a prodigious lot of good to do as I was
told and to have some one sitting by me who asked me things and ordered me about and scolded
me. If the professor or his wife had done so an hour or two earlier, it would have spared me a lot.
But no, it was well as it was. I should have missed much.
"What's your name?" she asked suddenly.
"Harry."
"Harry? A babyish sort of name. And a baby you are, Harry, in spite of your few grey hairs.
You're a baby and you need some one to look after you. I'll say no more of dancing. But look at
your hair! Have you no wife, no sweetheart?"
"I haven't a wife any longer. We are divorced. A sweetheart, yes, but she doesn't live here. I
don't see her very often. We don't get on very well."
She whistled softly.
"You must be difficult if nobody sticks to you. But now tell me what was up in particular this
evening? What sent you chasing round out of your wits? Down on your luck? Lost at cards?"
This was not easy to explain.
"Well," I began, "you see, it was really a small matter. I had an invitation to dinner with a
professor—I'm not one myself, by the way—and really I ought not to have gone. I've lost the
habit of being in company and making conversation. I've forgotten how it's done. As soon as I
entered the house I had the feeling something would go wrong, and when I hung my hat on the
peg I thought to myself that perhaps I should want it sooner than I expected. Well, at the
professor's there was a picture that stood on the table, a stupid picture. It annoyed me—"
"What sort of picture? Annoyed you—why?" she broke in.
"Well, it was a picture representing Goethe, the poet Goethe, you know. But it was not in the
least as he really looked. That, of course, nobody can know exactly. He has been dead a hundred
years. However, some artist of today had painted his portrait as he imagined him to have been
and prettified him, and this picture annoyed me. It made me perfectly sick. I don't know whether
you can understand that."
"I understand all right. Don't you worry. Go on."
"Before this in any case I didn't see eye to eye with the professor. Like nearly all professors,
he is a great patriot, and during the war did his bit in the way of deceiving the public, with the
best intentions, of course. I, however, am opposed to war. But that's all one. To continue my
story, there was not the least need for me to look at the picture—"
"Certainly not."
"But in the first place it made me sorry because of Goethe, whom I love very dearly, and then,
besides, I thought—well, I had better say just how I thought, or felt. There I was, sitting with
people as one of themselves and believing that they thought of Goethe as I did and had the same
picture of him in their minds as I, and there stood that tasteless, false and sickly affair and they
thought it lovely and had not the least idea that the spirit of that picture and the spirit of Goethe
were exact opposites. They thought the picture splendid, and so they might for all I cared, but for
me it ended, once and for all, any confidence, any friendship, any feeling of affinity I could have
for these people. In any case, my friendship with them did not amount to very much. And so I
got furious, and sad, too, when I saw that I was quite alone with no one to understand me. Do

you see what I mean?"
"It is very easy to see. And next? Did you throw the picture at them?"
"No, but I was rather insulting and left the house. I wanted to go home, but—"
"But you'd have found no mummy there to comfort the silly baby or scold it. I must say,
Harry, you make me almost sorry for you. I never knew such a baby."
So it seemed to me, I must own. She gave me a glass of wine to drink. In fact, she was like a
mother to me. In a glimpse, though, now and then I saw how young and beautiful she was.
"And so," she began again, "Goethe has been dead a hundred years, and you're very fond of
him, and you have a wonderful picture in your head of what he must have looked like, and you
have the right to, I suppose. But the artist who adores Goethe too, and makes a picture of him,
has no right to do it, nor the professor either, nor anybody else—because you don't like it. You
find it intolerable. You have to be insulting and leave the house. If you had sense, you would
laugh at the artist and the professor—laugh and be done with it. If you were out of your senses,
you'd smash the picture in their faces. But as you're only a little baby, you run home and want to
hang yourself. I've understood your story very well, Harry. It's a funny story. You make me
laugh. But don't drink so fast. Burgundy should be sipped. Otherwise you'll get hot. But you have
to be told everything—like a little child."
She admonished me with the look of a severe governess of sixty.
"Oh, I know," I said contentedly. "Only tell me everything."
"What shall I tell you?"
"Whatever you feel like telling me."
"Good. Then I'll tell you something. For an hour I've been saying 'thou' to you, and you have
been saying 'you' to me. Always Latin and Greek, always as complicated as possible. When a
girl addresses you intimately and she isn't disagreeable to you, then you should address her in the
same way. So now you've learned something. And secondly—for half an hour I've known that
you're called Harry. I know it because I asked you. But you don't care to know my name."
"Oh, but indeed—I'd like to know very much."
"You're too late! If we meet again, you can ask me again. Today I shan't tell you. And now
I'm going to dance."
At the first sign she made of getting up, my heart sank like lead. I dreaded her going and
leaving me alone, for then it would all come back as it was before. In a moment, the old dread
and wretchedness took hold of me like a toothache that has passed off and then comes back of a
sudden and burns like fire. Oh, God, had I forgotten, then, what was waiting for me? Had
anything altered?
"Stop," I implored, "don't go. You can dance of course, as much as you please, but don't stay
away too long. Come back again, come back again."
She laughed as she got up. I expected her to be taller. She was slender, but not tall. Again I
was reminded of some one. Of whom? I could not make out.
"You're coming back?"
"I'm coming back, but it may be half an hour or an hour, perhaps. I want to tell you
something. Shut your eyes and sleep for a little. That's what you need."
I made room for her to pass. Her skirt brushed my knees and she looked, as she went, in a
little pocket mirror, lifted her eyebrows, and powdered her chin; then she disappeared into the
dance hall. I looked round me; strange faces, smoking men, spilled beer on marble-tops, clatter
and clamor everywhere, the dance music in my ear. I was to sleep, she had said. Ah, my good
child, you know a lot about my sleep that is shyer than a weasel! Sleep in this hurly-burly, sitting
at a table, amidst the clatter of beer steins! I sipped the wine and, taking out a cigar, looked
round for matches, but as I had after all no inclination to smoke, I put down the cigar on the table
in front of me. "Shut your eyes," she had said. God knows where the girl got her voice; it was so
deep and good and maternal. It was good to obey such a voice, I had found that out already.
Obediently I shut my eyes, leaned my head against the wall and heard the roar of a hundred

mingled noises surge around me and smiled at the idea of sleep in such a place. I made up my
mind to go to the door of the dance hall and from there catch a glimpse of my beautiful girl as
she danced. I made a movement to go, then felt at last how unutterably tired out I was from my
hours of wandering and remained seated; and, thereupon I fell asleep as I had been told. I slept
greedily, thankfully, and dreamed more lightly and pleasantly than I had for a long while.
I dreamed that I was waiting in an old-fashioned anteroom. At first I knew no more than that
my audience was with some Excellency or other. Then it came to me that it was Goethe who was
to receive me. Unfortunately I was not there quite on a personal call. I was a reporter, and this
worried me a great deal and I could not understand how the devil I had got into such a fix.
.Besides this, I was upset by a scorpion that I had seen a moment before trying to climb up my
leg. I had shaken myself free of the black crawling beast, but I did not know where it had got to
next and did not dare make a grab after it.
Also I was not very sure whether I had been announced by a mistake to Matthisson instead of
to Goethe, and him again I mixed up in my dream with Bürger, for I took him for the author of
the poem to Molly. Moreover I would have liked extremely to meet Molly. I imagined her
wonderful, tender, musical. If only I were not here at the orders of that cursed newspaper office.
My ill-humor over this increased until by degrees it extended even to Goethe, whom I suddenly
treated to all manner of reflections and reproaches. It was going to be a lively interview. The
scorpion, however, dangerous though he was and hidden no doubt somewhere within an inch of
me, was all the same not so bad perhaps. Possibly he might even betoken something friendly. It
seemed to me extremely likely that he had something to do with Molly. He might be a kind of
messenger from her—or an heraldic beast, dangerously and beautifully emblematic of woman
and sin. Might not his name perhaps be Vulpius? But at that moment a flunkey threw open the
door. I rose and went in.
There stood old Goethe, short and very erect, and on his classic breast, sure enough, was the
corpulent star of some Order. Not for a moment did he relax his commanding attitude, his air of
giving audience, and of controlling the world from that museum of his at Weimar. Indeed, he had
scarcely looked at me before with a nod and a jerk like an old raven he began pompously: "Now,
you young people have, I believe, very little appreciation of us and our efforts."
"You are quite right," said I, chilled by his ministerial glance. "We young people have,
indeed, very little appreciation of you. You are too pompous for us, Excellency, too vain and
pompous, and not outright enough. That is, no doubt, at the bottom of it—not outright enough."
The little old man bent his erect head forward, and as his hard mouth with its official folds
relaxed in a little smile and became enchantingly alive, my heart gave a sudden bound; for all at
once the poem came to my mind—"The dusk with folding wing"—and I remembered that it was
from the lips of this man that the poem came. Indeed, at this moment I was entirely disarmed and
overwhelmed and would have chosen of all things to kneel before him. But I held myself erect
and heard him say with a smile: "Oh, so you accuse me of not being outright? What a thing to
say! Will you explain yourself a little more fully?"
I was very glad indeed to do so.
"Like all great spirits, Herr von Goethe, you have clearly recognised and felt the riddle and
the hopelessness of human life, with its moments of transcendence that sink again to
wretchedness, and the impossibility of rising to one fair peak of feeling except at the cost of
many days' enslavement to the daily round; and, then, the ardent longing for the realm of the
spirit in eternal and deadly war with the equally ardent and holy love of the lost innocence of
nature, the whole frightful suspense in vacancy and uncertainty, this condemnation to the
transient that can never be valid, that is ever experimental and dilettantish; in short, the utter lack
of purpose to which the human state is condemned—to its consuming despair. You have known
all this, yes, and said as much over and over again; yet you gave up your whole life to preaching
its opposite, giving utterance to faith and optimism and spreading before yourself and others the
illusion that our spiritual strivings mean something and endure. You have lent a deaf ear to those

that plumbed the depths and suppressed the voices that told the truth of despair, and not in
yourself only, but also in Kleist and Beethoven. Year after year you lived on at Weimar
accumulating knowledge and collecting objects, writing letters and gathering them in, as though
in your old age you had found the real way to discover the eternal in the momentary, though you
could only mummify it, and to spiritualise nature though you could only hide it with a pretty
mask. This is why we reproach you with insincerity."
The old bigwig kept his eyes musingly on mine, smiling as before.
Then to my surprise, he asked, "You must have a strong objection, then, to the Magic Flute of
Mozart?"
And before I could protest, he went on:
"The Magic Flute presents life to us as a wondrous song. It honors our feelings, transient, as
they are, as something eternal and divine. It agrees neither with Herr von Kleist nor with Herr
Beethoven. It preaches optimism and faith."
"I know, I know," I cried in a rage. "God knows why you hit of all things on the Magic Flute
that is dearer to me than anything else in the world. But Mozart did not live to be eighty-two. He
did not make pretensions in his own life to the enduring and the orderly and to exalted dignity as
you did. He did not think himself so important! He sang his divine melodies and died. He died
young—poor and misunderstood—"
I lost my breath. A thousand things ought to have been said in ten words. My forehead began
to sweat.
Goethe, however, said very amiably: "It may be unforgivable that I lived to be eighty-two. My
satisfaction on that account was, however, less than you may think. You are right that a great
longing for survival possessed me continually. I was in continual fear of death and continually
struggling with it. I believe that the struggle against death, the unconditional and self-willed
determination to live, is the motive power behind the lives and activities of all outstanding men.
My eighty-two years showed just as conclusively that we must all die in the end as if I had died
as a schoolboy. If it helps to justify me I should like to say this too: my nature had much of the
child in it, its curiosity and love for idleness and play. Well, and so it went on and on, till I saw
that sooner or later there must be enough of play."
As he said this, his smile was quite cunning—a downright roguish leer. He had grown taller
and his erect bearing and the constrained dignity of his face had disappeared. The air, too, around
us was now ringing with melodies, all of them songs of Goethe's. I heard Mozart's "Violets" and
Schubert's "Again thou fillest brake and vale" quite distinctly. And Goethe's face was rosy and
youthful, and he laughed; and now he resembled Mozart like a brother, now Schubert, and the
star on his breast was composed entirely of wild flowers. A yellow primrose blossomed
luxuriantly in the middle of it.
It did not altogether suit me to have the old gentleman avoid my questions and accusations in
this sportive manner, and I looked at him reproachfully. At that he bent forward and brought his
mouth, which had now become quite like a child's, close to my ear and whispered softly into it:
"You take the old Goethe much too seriously, my young friend. You should not take old people
who are already dead seriously. It does them injustice. We immortals do not like things to be
taken seriously. We like joking. Seriousness, young man, is an accident of time. It consists, I
don't mind telling you in confidence, in putting too high a value on time. I, too, once put too high
a value on time. For that reason I wished to be a hundred years old. In eternity, however, there is
no time, you see. Eternity is a mere moment, just long enough for a joke."
And indeed there was no saying another serious word to the man. He capered joyfully and
nimbly up and down and made the primrose shoot out from his star like a rocket and then he
made it shrink and disappear. While he flickered to and fro with his dance steps and figures, it
was borne in upon me that he at least had not neglected learning to dance. He could do it
wonderfully. Then I remembered the scorpion, or Molly, rather, and I called out to Goethe: "Tell
me, is Molly there?"

Goethe laughed aloud. He went to his table and opened a drawer; took out a handsome leather
or velvet box, and held it open under my eyes. There, small, faultless, and gleaming, lay a
diminutive effigy of a woman's leg on the dark velvet, an enchanting leg, with the knee a little
bent and the foot pointing downwards to end in the daintiest of toes.
I stretched out my hand, for I had quite fallen in love with the little leg and I wanted to have
it, but just as I was going to take hold of it with my finger and thumb, the little toy seemed to
move with a tiny start and it occurred to me suddenly that this might be the scorpion. Goethe
seemed to read my thought, and even to have wanted to cause this deep timidity, this hectic
struggle between desire and dread. He held the provoking little scorpion close to my face and
watched me start forward with desire, then start back with dread; and this seemed to divert him
exceedingly. While he was teasing me with the charming, dangerous thing, he became quite old
once more, very, very old, a thousand years old, with hair as white as snow, and his withered
graybeard's face laughed a still and soundless laughter that shook him to the depths with abysmal
old-man's humor.
When I woke I had forgotten the dream; it did not come back to me till later. I had slept for
nearly an hour, as I never thought I could possibly have done at a café table with the music and
the bustle all round me. The dear girl stood in front of me with one hand on my shoulder.
"Give me two or three marks," she said. "I've spent something in there."
I gave her my purse. She took it and was soon back again.
"Well, now I can sit with you for a little and then I have to go. I have an engagement."
I was alarmed.
"With whom?" I asked quickly.
"With a man, my dear Harry. He has invited me to the Odéon Bar."
"Oh! I didn't think you would leave me alone."
"Then you should have invited me yourself. Someone has got in before you. Well, there's
good money saved. Do you know the Odéon? Nothing but champagne after midnight. Armchairs
like at a club, Negro band, very smart."
I had never considered all this.
"But let me invite you," I entreated her. "I thought it was an understood thing, now that we've
made friends. Invite yourself wherever you like. Do, please, I beg you."
"That is nice of you. But, you see, a promise is a promise, and I've given my word and I shall
keep it and go. Don't worry any more over that. Have another drink of wine. There's still some in
the bottle. Drink it up and then go comfortably home and sleep. Promise me."
"No, you know that's just what I can't do—go home."
"Oh—you—with your tales! Will you never be done—with your Goethe?" (The dream about
Goethe came back to me at that moment.) "But if you really can't go home, stay here. There are
bedrooms. Shall I see about one for you?"
I was satisfied with that and asked where I could find her again? Where did she live? She
would not tell me. I should find her in one place or another if I looked.
"Mayn't I invite you somewhere?"
"Where?"
"Where and when you like."
"Good. Tuesday for dinner at the old Franciscan. First floor. Good-bye."
She gave me her hand. I noticed for the first time how well it matched her voice—a beautiful
hand, firm and intelligent and good-natured. She laughed at me when I kissed it.
Then at the last moment she turned once more and said: "I'll tell you something else—about
Goethe. What you felt about him and finding the picture of him more than you could put up with,
I often feel about the saints."
"The saints? Are you so religious?"
"No, I'm not religious, I'm sorry to say. But I was once and shall be again. There is no time
now to be religious."

"No time. Does it need time to be religious?"
"Oh, yes. To be religious you must have time and, even more, independence of time. You
can't be religious in earnest and at the same time live in actual things and still take them
seriously, time and money and the Odéon Bar and all that."
"Yes, I understand. But what was that you said about the saints?"
"Well, there are many saints I'm particularly fond of—Stephen, St. Francis and others. I often
see pictures of them and of the Savior and the Virgin—such utterly lying and false and silly
pictures—and I can put up with them just as little as you could with that picture of Goethe. When
I see one of those sweet and silly Saviors or St. Francises and see how other people find them
beautiful and edifying, I feel it is an insult to the real Savior and it makes me think: Why did He
live and suffer so terribly if people find a picture as silly as that satisfactory to them! But in spite
of this I know that my own picture of the Savior or St. Francis is only a human picture and falls
short of the original, and that the Savior Himself would find the picture I have of Him within me
just as stupid as I do those sickly reproductions. I don't say this to justify you in your ill temper
and rage with the picture of Goethe. There's no justification. I say it simply to show you that I
can understand you. You learned people and artists have, no doubt, all sorts of superior things in
your heads; but you're human beings like the rest of us, and we, too, have our dreams and
fancies. I noticed, for example, learned sir, that you felt a slight embarrassment when it came to
telling me your Goethe story. You had to make a great effort to make your ideas comprehensible
to a simple girl like me. Well, and so I wanted to show you that you needn't have made such an
effort. I understand you all right. And now I've finished, and your place is in bed."
She went away and an old house porter took me up two flights of stairs. But first he asked me
where my luggage was, and when he heard that I hadn't any, I had to pay down what he called
"sleep money." Then he took me up an old dark staircase to a room upstairs and left me alone.
There was a bleak wooden bedstead, and on the wall hung a saber and a colored print of
Garibaldi and also a withered wreath that had once figured in a club festival. I would have given
much for pyjamas. At any rate there was water and a small towel and I could wash. Then I lay
down on the bed in my clothes, and leaving the light on, gave myself up to my reflections. So I
had settled accounts with Goethe. It was splendid that he had come to me in a dream. And this
wonderful girl—if only I had known her name! All of a sudden there was a human being, a
living human being, to shatter the death that had come down over me like a glass case, and to put
out a hand to me, a good and beautiful and warm hand. All of a sudden there were things that
concerned me again, which I could think of with joy and eagerness. All of a sudden a door was
thrown open through which life came in. Perhaps I could live once more and once more be a
human being. My soul that had fallen asleep in the cold and nearly frozen breathed once more,
and sleepily spread its weak and tiny wings. Goethe had been with me. A girl had bidden me eat
and drink and sleep, and had shown me friendship and had laughed at me and had called me a
silly little boy. And this wonderful friend had talked to me of the saints and shown me that even
when I had outdone myself in absurdity I was not alone. I was not an incomprehensible and
ailing exception. There were people akin to me. I was understood. Should I see her again? Yes,
for certain. She could be relied upon. "A promise is a promise."
And before I knew, I was asleep once more and slept four or five hours. It had gone ten when
I woke. My clothes were all creases. I felt utterly exhausted. And in my head was the memory of
yesterday's half-forgotten horror; but I had life, hope and happy thoughts. As I returned to my
room I experienced nothing of that terror that this return had had for me the day before. On the
stairs above the araucaria I met the "aunt," my landlady. I saw her seldom but her kindly nature
always delighted me. The meeting was not very propitious, for I was still unkempt and
uncombed after my night out, and I had not shaved. I greeted her and would have passed on. As
a rule, she always respected my desire to live alone and unobserved. Today, however, as it
turned out, a veil between me and the outer world seemed to be torn aside, a barrier fallen. She
laughed and stopped.

"You have been on a spree, Mr. Haller. You were not in bed last night. You must be pretty
tired!"
"Yes," I said, and was forced to laugh too. "There was something lively going on last night,
and as I did not like to shock you, I slept at an hotel. My respect for the repose and dignity of
your house is great. I sometimes feel like a 'foreign body' in it."
"You are poking fun, Mr. Haller."
"Only at myself."
"You ought not to do that even. You ought not to feel like a 'foreign body' in my house. You
should live as best pleases you and do as best you can. I have had before now many exceedingly
respectable tenants, jewels of respectability, but not one has been quieter or disturbed us less
than you. And now—would you like some tea?"
I did not refuse. Tea was brought me in her drawing room with the old-fashioned pictures and
furniture, and we had a little talk. In her friendly way she elicited this and that about my life and
thoughts without actually asking questions and listened attentively to my confessions, while at
the same time she did not give them more importance than an intelligent and motherly woman
would to the peccadilloes of men. We talked, too, of her nephew and she showed me in a
neighboring room his latest hobby, a wireless set. There the industrious young man spent his
evenings, fitting together the apparatus, a victim to the charms of wireless, and kneeling on pious
knees before the god of applied science whose might had made it possible to discover after
thousands of years a fact which every thinker has always known and put to better use than in this
recent and very imperfect development. We spoke about this, for the aunt had a slight leaning to
piety and religious topics were not unwelcome to her. I told her that the omnipresence of all
forces and facts was well known to ancient India, and that science had merely brought a small
fraction of this fact into general use by devising for it, that is, for sound waves, a receiver and
transmitter which were still in their first stages and miserably defective. The principal fact
known to that ancient knowledge was, I said, the unreality of time. This science had not yet
observed. Finally, it would, of course, make this "discovery," also, and then the inventors would
get busy over it. The discovery would be made—and perhaps very soon—that there were
floating round us not only the pictures and events of the transient present in the same way that
music from Paris or Berlin was now heard in Frankfurt or Zurich, but that all that had ever
happened in the past could be registered and brought back likewise. We might well look for the
day when, with wires or without, with or without the disturbance of other sounds, we should hear
King Solomon speaking, or Walter von der Vogelweide. And all this, I said, just as today was the
case with the beginnings of wireless, would be of no more service to man than as an escape from
himself and his true aims, and a means of surrounding himself with an ever closer mesh of
distractions and useless activities. But instead of embarking on these familiar topics with my
customary bitterness and scorn for the times and for science, I made a joke of them; and the aunt
smiled, and we sat together for an hour or so and drank our tea with much content.
It was for Tuesday evening that I had invited the charming and remarkable girl of the Black
Eagle, and I was a good deal put to it to know how to pass the time till then; and when at last
Tuesday came, the importance of my relation to this unknown girl had become alarmingly clear
to me. I thought of nothing but her. I expected everything from her. I was ready to lay everything
at her feet. I was not in the least in love with her. Yet I had only to imagine that she might fail to
keep the appointment, or forget it, to see where I stood. Then the world would be a desert once
more, one day as dreary and worthless as the last, and the deathly stillness and wretchedness
would surround me once more on all sides with no way out from this hell of silence except the
razor. And these few days had not made me think any the more fondly of the razor. It had lost
none of its terror. This was indeed the hateful truth: I dreaded to cut my throat with a dread that
crushed my heart. My fear was as wild and obstinate as though I were the healthiest of men and
my life a paradise. I realised my situation recklessly and without a single illusion. I realised that
it was the unendurable tension between inability to live and inability to die that made the

unknown girl, the pretty dancer of the Black Eagle, so important to me. She was the one window,
the one tiny crack of light in my black hole of dread. She was my release and my way to
freedom. She had to teach me to live or teach me to die. She had to touch my deadened heart
with her firm and pretty hand, and at the touch of life it would either leap again to flame or
subside in ashes. I could not imagine whence she derived these powers, what the source of her
magic was, in what secret soil this deep meaning she had for me had grown up; nor did it matter.
I did not care to know. There was no longer the least importance for me in any knowledge or
perception I might have. Indeed it was just in that line that I was overstocked, for the ignominy
under which I suffered lay just in this—that I saw my own situation so clearly and was so very
conscious, too, of hers. I saw this wretch, this brute beast of a Steppenwolf as a fly in a web, and
saw too the approaching decision of his fate. Entangled and defenceless he hung in the web. The
spider was ready to devour him, and further off was the rescuing hand. I might have made the
most intelligent and penetrating remarks about the ramifications and the causes of my sufferings,
my sickness of soul, my general bedevilment of neurosis. The mechanism was transparent to me.
But what I needed was not knowledge and understanding. What I longed for in my despair was
life and resolution, action and reaction, impulse and impetus.
Although during the few days of waiting I never despaired of my friend keeping her word,
this did not prevent my being in a state of acute suspense when the day arrived. Never in my life
have I waited more impatiently for a day to end. And while the suspense and impatience were
almost intolerable, they were at the same time of wonderful benefit to me. It was unimaginably
beautiful and new for me who for a long while had been too listless to await anything or to find
joy in anything—yes, it was wonderful to be running here and there all day long in restless
anxiety and intense expectation, to be anticipating the meeting and the talk and the outcome that
the evening had in store, to be shaving and dressing with peculiar care (new linen, new tie, new
laces in my shoes). Whoever this intelligent and mysterious girl might be and however she got
into this relation to myself was all one. She was there. The miracle had happened. I had found a
human being once more and a new interest in life. All that mattered was that the miracle should
go on, that I should surrender myself to this magnetic power and follow this star.
Unforgettable moment when I saw her once more! I sat in the old-fashioned and comfortable
restaurant at a small table that I had quite unnecessarily engaged by telephone, and studied the
menu. In a tumbler were two orchids I had bought for my new acquaintance. I had a good while
to wait, but I was sure she would come and was no longer agitated. And then she came. She
stopped for a moment at the cloakroom and greeted me only by an observant and rather quizzical
glance from her clear gray eyes. Distrustful, I took care to see how the waiter behaved towards
her. No, there was nothing confidential, no lack of distance. He was scrupulously respectful. And
yet they knew each other. She called him Emil.
She laughed with pleasure when I gave her the orchids.
"That's sweet of you, Harry. You wanted to make me a present, didn't you, and weren't sure
what to choose. You weren't quite sure you would be right in making me a present. I might be
insulted, and so you chose orchids, and though they're only flowers, they're dear enough. So I
thank you ever so much. And by the way I'll tell you now that I won't take presents from you. I
live on men, but I won't live on you. But how you have altered! No one would know you. The
other day you looked as if you had been cut down from a gallows, and now you're very nearly a
man again. And now-have you carried out my orders?"
"What orders?"
"You've never forgotten? I mean, have you learned the fox trot? You said you wished nothing
better than to obey my commands, that nothing was dearer to you than obeying me. Do you
remember?"
"Indeed I do, and so it shall be. I meant it."
"And yet you haven't learned to dance yet?"
"Can that be done so quickly—in a day or two?"

"Of course. The fox trot you can learn in an hour. The Boston in two. The tango takes longer,
but that you don't need."
"But now I really must know your name."
She looked at me for a moment without speaking.
"Perhaps you can guess it. I should be so glad if you did. Pull yourself together and take a
good look at me. Hasn't it ever occurred to you that sometimes my face is just like a boy's? Now,
for example."
Yes, now that I looked at her face carefully, I had to admit she was right. It was a boy's face.
And after a moment I saw something in her face that reminded me of my own boyhood and of
my friend of those days. His name was Herman. For a moment it seemed that she had turned into
this Herman.
"If you were a boy," said I in amazement, "I should say your name was Herman."
"Who knows, perhaps I am one and am simply in woman's clothing," she said, joking.
"Is your name Hermine?"
She nodded, beaming, delighted at my guess. At that moment the waiter brought the food and
we began to eat. She was as happy as a child. Of all the things that pleased and charmed me
about her, the prettiest and most characteristic was her rapid changes from the deepest
seriousness to the drollest merriment, and this without doing herself the least violence, with the
facility of a gifted child. Now for a while she was merry and chaffed me about the fox trot, trod
on my feet under the table, enthusiastically praised the meal, remarked on the care I had taken
dressing, though she also had many criticisms to make on my appearance.
Meanwhile I asked her: "How did you manage to look like a boy and make me guess your
name?"
"Oh, you did all that yourself. Doesn't your learning reveal to you that the reason why I please
you and mean so much to you is because I am a kind of looking glass for you, because there's
something in me that answers you and understands you? Really, we ought all to be such looking
glasses to each other and answer and correspond to each other, but such owls as you are a bit
peculiar. On the slightest provocation they give themselves over to the strangest notions that they
can see nothing and read nothing any longer in the eyes of other men and then nothing seems
right to them. And then when an owl like that after all finds a face that looks back into his and
gives him a glimpse of understanding—well, then he's pleased, naturally."
"There's nothing you don't know, Hermine," I cried in amazement. "It's exactly as you say.
And yet you're so entirely different from me. Why, you're my opposite. You have all that I lack."
"So you think.," she said shortly, "and it's well you should."
And now a dark cloud of seriousness spread over her face. It was indeed like a magic mirror
to me. Of a sudden her face bespoke seriousness and tragedy and it looked as fathomless as the
hollow eyes of a mask. Slowly, as though it were dragged from her word for word, she said:
"Mind, don't forget what you said to me. You said that I was to command you and that it
would be a joy to you to obey my commands. Don't forget that. You must know this, my little
Harry—just as something in me corresponds to you and gives you confidence, so it is with me.
The other day when I saw you come in to the Black Eagle, exhausted and beside yourself and
scarcely in this world any longer, it came to me at once: This man will obey me. All he wants is
that I should command him. And that's what I'm going to do. That's why I spoke to you and why
we made friends."
She spoke so seriously from a deep impulse of her very soul that I scarcely liked to encourage
her. I tried to calm her down. She shook her head with a frown and with a compelling look went
on: "I tell you, you must keep your word, my boy. If you don't you'll regret it. You will have
many commands from me and you will carry them out. Nice ones and agreeable ones that it will
be a pleasure to you to obey. And at the last you will fulfill my last command as well, Harry."
"I will," I said, half giving in. "What will your last command be?"
I guessed it already—God knows why.

She shivered as though a passing chill went through her and seemed to be waking slowly from
her trance. Her eyes did not release me. Suddenly she became still more sinister.
"If I were wise, I shouldn't tell you. But I won't be wise, Harry, not for this time. I'll be just
the opposite. So now mind what I say! You will hear it and forget it again. You will laugh over
it, and you will weep over it. So look out! I am going to play with you for life and death, little
brother, and before we begin the game I'm going to lay my cards on the table."
How beautiful she looked, how unearthly, when she said that! Cool and clear, there swam in
her eyes a conscious sadness. These eyes of hers seemed to have suffered all imaginable
suffering and to have acquiesced in it. Her lips spoke with difficulty and as though something
hindered them, as though a keen frost had numbed her face; but between her lips at the corners of
her mouth where the tip of her tongue showed at rare intervals, there was but sweet sensuality
and inward delight that contradicted the expression of her face and the tone of her voice. A short
lock hung down over the smooth expanse of her forehead, and from this corner of her forehead
whence fell the lock of hair, her boyishness welled up from time to time like a breath of life and
cast the spell of a hermaphrodite. I listened with an eager anxiety and yet as though dazed and
only half aware.
"You like me," she went on, "for the reason I said before, because I have broken through your
isolation. I have caught you from the very gates of hell and wakened you to a new life. But I
want more from you—much more. I want to make you fall in love with me. No, don't interrupt
me. Let me speak. You like me very much. I can see that. And you're grateful to me. But you're
not in love with me. I mean to make you fall in love with me, and it is part of my calling. It is my
living to be able to make men fall in love with me. But mind this, I don't do it because I find you
exactly captivating. I'm as little in love with you as you with me. But I need you as you do me.
You need me now, for the moment, because you're desperate. You're dying just for the lack of a
push to throw you into the water and bring you to life again. You need me to teach you to dance
and to laugh and to live. But I need you, not today—later, for something very important and
beautiful too. When you are in love with me I will give you my last command and you will obey
it, and it will be the better for both of us."
She pulled one of the brown and purple green-veined orchids up a little in the glass and
bending over stared a moment at the bloom.
"You won't find it easy, but you will do it. You will carry out my command and—kill me.
There—ask no more."
When she came to the end her eyes were still on the orchid, and her face relaxed, losing its
strain like a flower bud unfolding its petals. In an instant there was an enchanting smile on her
lips while her eyes for a moment were still fixed and spellbound. Then she gave a shake of her
head with its little boyish lock, took a sip of water, and realizing of a sudden that we were at a
meal fell to eating again with appetite and enjoyment.
I had heard her uncanny communication clearly word for word. I had even guessed what her
last command was before she said it and was horrified no longer. All that she said sounded as
convincing to me as a decree of fate. I accepted it without protest. And yet in spite of the
terrifying seriousness with which she had spoken I did not take it all as fully real and serious.
While part of my soul drank in her words and believed in them, another part appeased me with a
nod and took note that Hermine too, for all her wisdom and health and assurance, had her
fantasies and twilight states. Scarcely was her last word spoken before a layer of unreality and
ineffectuality settled over the whole scene.
All the same I could not get back to realities and probabilities with the same lightness as
Hermine.
"And so I shall kill you one day?" I asked, still half in a dream while she laughed, and
attacked her fowl with great relish.
"Of course," she nodded lightly. "Enough of that. It is time to eat. Harry, be an angel and
order me a little more salad. Haven't you any appetite? It seems to me you've still to learn all the

things that come naturally to other people, even the pleasure of eating. So look, my boy, I must
tell you that this is the celebration of the duck, and when you pick the tender flesh from the bone
it's a festal occasion and you must be just as eager and glad at heart and delighted as a lover
when he unhooks his lady love for the first time. Don't you understand? Oh, you're a sheep! Are
you ready? I'm going to give you a piece off the little bone. So open your mouth. Oh, what a
fright you are! There he goes, squinting round the room in case any one sees him taking a bite
from my fork. Don't be afraid, you prodigal son, I won't make a scandal. But it's a poor fellow
who can't take his pleasure without asking other people's permission."
The scene that had gone before became more and more unreal. I was less and less able to
believe that these were the same eyes that a moment before had been fixed in a dread obsession.
But in this Hermine was like life itself, one moment succeeding to the next and not one to be
foreseen. Now she was eating, and the duck and the salad, the sweet and the liqueur were the
important thing, and each time the plates were changed a new chapter began. Yet though she
played at being a child she had seen through me completely, and though she made me her pupil
there and then in the game of living for each fleeting moment, she seemed to know more of life
than is known to the wisest of the wise. It might be the highest wisdom or the merest artlessness.
It is certain in any case that life is quite disarmed by the gift to live so entirely in the present, to
treasure with such eager care every flower by the wayside and the light that plays on every
passing moment. Was I to believe that this happy child with her hearty appetite and the air of a
gourmet was at the same time a victim of hysterical visions who wished to die? or a careful
calculating woman who, unmoved herself, had the conscious intention of making me her lover
and her slave? I could not believe it. No, her surrender to the moment was so simple and
complete that the fleeting shadows and agitation to the very depths of the soul came to her no
less than every pleasurable impulse and were lived as fully.
Though I saw Hermine only for the second time that day, she knew everything about me and
it seemed to me quite impossible that I could ever have a secret from her. Perhaps she might not
understand everything of my spiritual life, might not perhaps follow me in my relation to music,
to Goethe, to Novalis or Baudelaire. This too, however, was open to question. Probably it would
give her as little trouble as the rest. And anyway, what was there left of my spiritual life? Hadn't
all that gone to atoms and lost its meaning? As for the rest, my more personal problems and
concerns, I had no doubt that she would understand them all. I should very soon be talking to her
about the Steppenwolf and the treatise and all the rest of it, though till now it had existed for
myself alone and never been mentioned to a single soul. Indeed, I could not resist the temptation
of beginning forthwith.
"Hermine," I said, "an extraordinary thing happened to me the other day. An unknown man
gave me a little book, the sort of thing you'd buy at a fair, and inside I found my whole story and
everything about me. Rather remarkable, don't you think?"
"What was it called," she asked lightly.
"Treatise on the Steppenwolf!"
"Oh, Steppenwolf is magnificent! And are you the Steppenwolf? Is that meant for you?"
"Yes, it's me. I am one who is half-wolf and half-man, or thinks himself so at least."
She made no answer. She gave me a searching look in the eyes, then looked at my hands, and
for a moment her face and expression had that deep seriousness and sinister passion of a few
minutes before. Making a guess at her thoughts I felt she was wondering whether I were wolf
enough to carry out her last command.
"That is, of course, your own fanciful idea," she said, becoming serene once more, "or a
poetical one, if you like. But there's something in it. You're no wolf today, but the other day
when you came in as if you had fallen from the moon there was really something of the beast
about you. It is just what struck me at the time."
She broke off as though surprised by a sudden idea.
"How absurd those words are, such as beast and beast of prey. One should not speak of

animals in that way. They may be terrible sometimes, but they're much more right than men."
"How do you mean—right?"
"Well, look at an animal, a cat, a dog, or a bird, or one of those beautiful great beasts in the
zoo, a puma or a giraffe. You can't help seeing that all of them are right. They're never in any
embarrassment. They always know what to do and how to behave themselves. They don't flatter
and they don't intrude. They don't pretend. They are as they are, like stones or flowers or stars in
the sky. Don't you agree?"
I did.
"Animals are sad as a rule," she went on. "And when a man is sad—I don't mean because he
has a toothache or has lost some money, but because he sees, for once in a way, how it all is with
life and everything, and is sad in earnest—he always looks a little like an animal. He looks not
only sad, but more right and more beautiful than usual. That's how it is, and that's how you
looked, Steppenwolf, when I saw you for the first time."
"Well, Hermine, and what do you think about this book with a description of me in it?"
"Oh, I can't always be thinking. Well talk about it another time. You can give it to me to read
one day. Or, no, if I ever start reading again, give me one of the books you've written yourself."
She asked for coffee and for a while seemed absent minded and distraught. Then she suddenly
beamed and seemed to have found the clue to her speculations.
"Hullo," she cried, delighted, "now I've got it!"
"What have you got?"
"The fox trot. I've been thinking about it all the evening. Now tell me, have you a room where
we two could dance sometimes? It doesn't matter if it's small, but there mustn't be anybody
underneath to come up and play hell if his ceiling rocks a bit. Well, that's fine, you can learn to
dance at home."
"Yes," I said in alarm, "so much the better. But I thought music was required."
"Of course it's required. You've got to buy that. At the most it won't cost as much as a course
of lessons. You save that because I'll give them myself. This way we have the music whenever
we like and at the end we have the gramophone in the bargain."
"The gramophone?"
"Of course. You can buy a small one and a few dance records—"
"Splendid," I cried, "and if you bring it off and teach me to dance, the gramophone is yours as
an honorarium. Agreed?"
I brought it out very pat, but scarcely from the heart. I could not picture the detested
instrument in my study among my books, and I was by no means reconciled to the dancing
either. It had been in my mind that I might try how it went for a while, though I was convinced
that I was too old and stiff and would never learn now. But to plunge into it all at once seemed a
bit too much. As an old and fastidious connoisseur of music, I could feel my gorge rising against
the gramophone and jazz and modern dance-music. It was more than any one could ask of me to
have dance tunes that were the latest rage of America let loose upon the sanctum where I took
refuge with Novalis and Jean Paul and to be made to dance to them. But it was not any one who
asked it of me. It was Hermine, and it was for her to command, and for me to obey. Of course, I
obeyed.
We met at a café on the following afternoon. Hermine was there before me, drinking tea, and
she pointed with a smile to my name which she had found in a newspaper. It was one of the
reactionary jingo papers of my own district in which from time to time violently abusive
references to me were circulated. During the war I had been opposed to it and, after, I had from
time to time counseled quiet and patience and humanity and a criticism that began at home; and I
had resisted the nationalist jingoism that became every day more pronounced, more insane and
unrestrained. Here, then, was another attack of this kind, badly written, in part the work of the
editor himself and in part stolen from articles of a similar kind in papers of similar tendencies to
his own. It is common knowledge that no one writes worse than these defenders of decrepit

ideas. No one plies his trade with less of decency and conscientious care. Hermine had read the
article, and it had informed her that Harry Haller was a noxious insect and a man who disowned
his native land, and that it stood to reason that no good could come to the country so long as such
persons and such ideas were tolerated and the minds of the young turned to sentimental ideas of
humanity instead of to revenge by arms upon the hereditary foe.
"Is that you?" asked Hermine, pointing to my name. "Well, you've made yourself some
enemies and no mistake. Does it annoy you?"
I read a few lines. There was not a single line of stereotyped abuse that had not been
drummed into me for years till I was sick and tired of it.
"No," I said, "it doesn't annoy me. I was used to it long ago. Now and again I have expressed
the opinion that every nation, and even every person, would do better, instead of rocking himself
to sleep with political catchwords about war guilt, to ask himself how far his own faults and
negligences and evil tendencies are guilty of the war and all the other wrongs of the world, and
that therein lies the only possible means of avoiding the next war. They don't forgive me that,
for, of course, they are themselves all guiltless, the Kaiser, the generals, the trade magnates, the
politicians, the papers. Not one of them has the least thing to blame himself for. Not one has any
guilt. One might believe that everything was for the best, even though a few million men lie
under the ground. And mind you, Hermine, even though such abusive articles cannot annoy me
any longer, they often sadden me all the same. Two-thirds of my countrymen read this kind of
newspaper, read things written in this tone every morning and every night, are every day worked
up and admonished and incited, and robbed of their peace of mind and better feelings by them,
and the end and aim of it all is to have the war over again, the next war that draws nearer and
nearer, and it will be a good deal more horrible than the last. All that is perfectly clear and
simple. Any one could comprehend it and reach the same conclusion after a moment's reflection.
But nobody wants to. Nobody wants to avoid the next war, nobody wants to spare himself and
his children the next holocaust if this be the cost. To reflect for one moment, to examine himself
for a while and ask what share he has in the world's confusion and wickedness—look you,
nobody wants to do that. And so there's no stopping it, and the next war is being pushed on with
enthusiasm by thousands upon thousands day by day. It has paralysed me since I knew it, and
brought me to despair. I have no country and no ideals left. All that comes to nothing but
decorations for the gentlemen by whom the next slaughter is ushered in. There is no sense in
thinking or saying or writing anything of human import, to bother one's head with thoughts of
goodness—for two or three men who do that, there are thousands of papers, periodicals,
speeches, meetings in public and in private, that make the opposite their daily endeavor and
succeed in it too."
Hermine had listened attentively.
"Yes," she said now, "there you're right enough. Of course, there will be another war. One
doesn't need to read the papers to know that. And of course one can be sad about it, but it isn't
any use. It is just the same as when a man is sad to think that one day, in spite of his utmost
efforts to prevent it, he will inevitably die. The war against death, dear Harry, is always a
beautiful, noble and wonderful and glorious thing, and so, it follows, is the war against war. But
it is always hopeless and quixotic too."
"That is perhaps true," I cried heatedly, "but truths like that—that we must all soon be dead
and so it is all one and the same—make the whole of life flat and stupid. Are we then to throw
everything up and renounce the spirit altogether and all effort and all that is human and let
ambition and money rule forever while we await the next mobilization over a glass of beer?"
Remarkable the look that Hermine now gave me, a look full of amusement, full of irony and
roguishness and fellow feeling, and at the same time so grave, so wise, so unfathomably serious.
"You shan't do that," she said in a voice that was quite maternal. "Your life will not be flat
and dull even though you know that your war will never be victorious. It is far flatter, Harry, to
fight for something good and ideal and to know all the time that you are bound to attain it. Are

ideals attainable? Do we live to abolish death? No—we live to fear it and then again to love it,
and just for death's sake it is that our spark of life glows for an hour now and then so brightly.
You're a child, Harry. Now, do as I tell you and come along. We've a lot to get done today. I am
not going to bother myself any more today about the war or the papers either. What about you?"
Oh, no, I had no wish to.
We went together—it was our first walk in the town—to a music shop and looked at
gramophones. We turned them on and off and heard them play, and when we had found one that
was very suitable and nice and cheap I wanted to buy it. Hermine, however, was not for such
rapid transactions. She pulled me back and I had to go off with her in search of another shop and
there, too, look at and listen to gramophones of every shape and size, from the dearest to the
cheapest, before she finally agreed to return to the first shop and buy the machine we first
thought of.
"You see," I said, "it would have been as simple to have taken it at once."
"Think so? And then perhaps tomorrow we should have seen the very same one in a shop
window at twenty francs less. And besides, it's fun buying things and you have to pay for your
fun. You've a lot to learn yet."
We got a porter to carry the purchase home.
Hermine made a careful inspection of my room. She commended the stove and the sofa, tried
the chairs, picked up the books, stood a long while in front of the photograph of Erica. We had
put the gramophone on a chest of drawers among piles of books. And now my instruction began.
Hermine turned on a fox trot and, after showing me the first steps, began to take me in hand. I
trotted obediently around with her, colliding with chairs, hearing her directions and failing to
understand them, treading on her toes, and being as clumsy as I was conscientious. After the
second dance she threw herself on the sofa and laughed like a child.
"Oh! how stiff you are! Just go straight ahead as if you were walking. There's not the least
need to exert yourself. Why, I should think you have made yourself positively hot, haven't you?
No, let's rest five minutes! Dancing, don't you see, is every bit as easy as thinking, when you can
do it, and much easier to learn. Now you can understand why people won't get the habit of
thinking and prefer calling Herr Haller a traitor to his country and waiting quietly for the next
war to come along."
In an hour she was gone, assuring me that it would go better next time. I had my own
thoughts about that, and I was sorely disappointed over my stupidity and clumsiness. It did not
seem to me that I had learned anything whatever and I did not believe that it would go better next
time. No, one had to bring certain qualities to dancing that I was entirely without, gaiety,
innocence, frivolity, elasticity. Well, I had always thought so.
But there, the next time it did in fact go better. I even got some fun out of it, and at the end of
the lesson Hermine announced that I was now proficient in the fox trot. But when she followed it
up by saying that I had to dance with her the next day at a restaurant, I was thrown into a panic
and resisted the idea with vehemence. She reminded me coolly of my oath of obedience and
arranged a meeting for tea on the following day at the Balance Hotel.
That evening I sat in my room and tried to read; but I could not. I was in dread of the morrow.
It was a most horrible thought that I, an elderly, shy, touchy crank, was to frequent one of those
modern deserts of jazz music, a thé dansant, and a far more horrible thought that I was to figure
there as a dancer, though I did not in the least know how to dance. And I own I laughed at myself
and felt shame in my own eyes when alone in the quiet of my study I turned on the machine and
softly in stockinged feet went through the steps of my dance.
A small orchestra played every other day at the Balance Hotel and tea and whisky were
served. I made an attempt at bribing Hermine, I put cakes before her and proposed a bottle of
good wine, but she was inflexible.
"You're not here for your amusement today. It is a dancing lesson."
I had to dance with her two or three times, and during an interval she introduced me to the

saxophone player, a dark and good-looking youth of Spanish or South American origin, who, she
told me, could play on all instruments and talk every language in the world. This señor appeared
to know Hermine well and to be on excellent terms with her. He had two saxophones of different
sizes in front of him which he played on by turns, while his darkly gleaming eyes scrutinized the
dancers and beamed with pleasure. I was surprised to feel something like jealousy of this
agreeable and charming musician, not a lover's jealousy, for there was no question of love
between Hermine and me, but a subtler jealousy of their friendship; for he did not seem to me so
eminently worthy of the interest, and even reverence, with which she so conspicuously
distinguished him. I apparently was to meet some queer people, I thought to myself in ill humor.
Then Hermine was asked to dance again, and I was left alone to drink tea and listen to the music,
a kind of music that I had never till that day known how to endure. Good God, I thought, so now
I am to be initiated, and made to feel at home in this world of idlers and pleasure seekers, a
world that is utterly strange and repugnant to me and that to this day I have always carefully
avoided and utterly despised, a smooth and stereotyped world of marble-topped tables, jazz
music, cocottes and commercial travelers! Sadly, I swallowed my tea and stared at the crowd of
second-rate elegance. Two beautiful girls caught my eye. They were both good dancers. I
followed their movements with admiration and envy. How elastic, how beautiful and gay and
certain their steps!
Soon Hermine appeared once more. She was not pleased with me. She scolded me and said
that I was not there to wear such a face and sit idling at tea tables. I was to pull myself together,
please, and dance. What, I knew no one? That was not necessary. Were there, then, no girls there
who met with my approval?
I pointed out one of the two, and the more attractive, who happened at the moment to be
standing near us. She looked enchanting in her pretty velvet dress with her short luxuriant blonde
hair and her rounded womanly arms. Hermine insisted that I should go up to her forthwith and
ask her to dance. I shrank back in despair.
"Indeed, I cannot do it," I said in my misery. "Of course, if I were young and good-looking—
but for a stiff old hack like me who can't dance for the life of him—she would laugh at me!"
Hermine looked at me contemptuously.
"And that I should laugh at you, of course, doesn't matter. What a coward you are! Every one
risks being laughed at when he addresses a girl. That's always at stake. So take the risk, Harry,
and if the worst come to the worst let yourself be laughed at. Otherwise it's all up with my belief
in your obedience...."
She was obdurate. I got up automatically and approached the young beauty just as the music
began again.
"As a matter of fact, I'm engaged for this one," she said and looked me up and down with her
large clear eyes, "but my partner seems to have got stranded at the bar over there, so come
along."
I grasped her and performed the first steps, still in amazement that she had not sent me about
my business. She was not long in taking my measure and in taking charge of me. She danced
wonderfully and I caught the infection. I forgot for the moment all the rules I had conscientiously
learned and simply floated along. I felt my partner's taut hips, her quick and pliant knees, and
looking in her young and radiant face I owned to her that this was the first time in my life that I
had ever really danced. She smiled encouragement and replied to my enchanted gaze and
flattering words with a wonderful compliance, not of words, but of movements whose soft
enchantment brought us more closely and delightfully in touch. My right hand held her waist
firmly and I followed every movement of her feet and arms and shoulders with eager happiness.
Not once, to my astonishment, did I step on her feet, and when the music stopped, we both stood
where we were and clapped till the dance was played again; and then with a lover's zeal I
devoutly performed the rite once more.
When, too soon, the dance came to an end, my beautiful partner in velvet disappeared and I

suddenly saw Hermine standing near me. She had been watching us.
"Now do you see?" she laughed approvingly. "Have you made the discovery that women's
legs are not table legs? Well, bravo! You know the fox trot now, thank the Lord. Tomorrow we'll
get on to the Boston, and in three weeks there's the Masked Ball at the Globe Rooms."
We had taken seats for the interval when the charming young Herr Pablo, with a friendly nod,
sat down beside Hermine. He seemed to be very intimate with her. As for myself, I must own
that I was not by any means delighted with the gentleman at this first encounter. He was goodlooking, I could not deny, both of face and figure, but I could not discover what further
advantages he had. Even his linguistic accomplishments sat very lightly on him—to such an
extent, indeed, that he did not speak at all beyond uttering such words as please, thanks, you bet,
rather and hallo. These, certainly, he knew in several languages. No, he said nothing, this Señor
Pablo, nor did he even appear to think much, this charming caballero. His business was with the
saxophone in the jazz-band and to this calling he appeared to devote himself with love and
passion. Often during the course of the music he would suddenly clap with his hands, or permit
himself other expressions of enthusiasm, such as, singing out "O O O, Ha Ha, Hallo." Apart from
this, however, he confined himself to being beautiful, to pleasing women, to wearing collars and
ties of the latest fashion and a great number of rings on his fingers. His manner of entertaining us
consisted in sitting beside us, in smiling upon us, in looking at his wrist watch and in rolling
cigarettes—at which he was an expert. His dark and beautiful Creole eyes and his black locks hid
no romance, no problems, no thoughts. Closely looked at, this beautiful demigod of love was no
more than a complacent and rather spoiled young man with pleasant manners. I talked to him
about his instrument and about tone colors in jazz music, and he must have seen that he was
confronted by one who had the enjoyment of a connoisseur for all that touched on music. But he
made no response, and while I, in compliment to him, or rather, to Hermine, embarked upon a
musicianly justification of jazz, he smiled amiably upon me and my efforts. Presumably, he had
not the least idea that there was any music but jazz or that any music had ever existed before it.
He was pleasant, certainly, pleasant and polite, and his large, vacant eyes smiled most
charmingly. Between him and me, however, there appeared to be nothing whatever in common.
Nothing of all that was, perhaps, important and sacred to him could be so for me as well. We
came of contrasted races and spoke languages in which no two words were akin. (Later,
nevertheless, Hermine told me a remarkable thing. She told me that Pablo, after a conversation
about me, had said that she must treat me very nicely, for I was so very unhappy. And when she
asked what brought him to that conclusion, he said: "Poor, poor fellow. Look at his eyes. Doesn't
know how to laugh.")
When the dark-eyed young man had taken his leave of us and the music began again,
Hermine stood up. "Now you might have another dance with me. Or don't you care to dance any
more?"
With her, too, I danced more easily now, in a freer and more sprightly fashion, even though
not so buoyantly and more self-consciously than with the other. Hermine had me lead, adapting
herself as softly and lightly as the leaf of a flower, and with her, too, I now experienced all these
delights that now advanced and now took wing. She, too, now exhaled the perfume of woman
and love, and her dancing, too, sang with intimate tenderness the lovely and enchanting song of
sex. And yet I could not respond to all this with warmth and freedom. I could not entirely forget
myself in abandon. Hermine stood in too close a relation to me. She was my comrade and
sister—my double, almost, in her resemblance not to me only, but to Herman, my boyhood
friend, the enthusiast, the poet, who had shared with ardor all my intellectual pursuits and
extravagances.
"I know," she said when I spoke of it. "I know that well enough. All the same, I shall make
you fall in love with me, but there's no use hurrying. First of all we're comrades, two people who
hope to be friends, because we have recognised each other. For the present we'll each learn from
the other and amuse ourselves together. I show you my little stage, and teach you to dance and to

have a little pleasure and be silly; and you show me your thoughts and something of all you
know."
"There's little there to show you, Hermine, I'm afraid. You know far more than I do. You're a
most remarkable person—and a woman. But do I mean anything to you? Don't I bore you?"
She looked down darkly to the floor.
"That's how I don't like to hear you talk. Think of that evening when you came broken from
your despair and loneliness, to cross my path and be my comrade. Why was it, do you think, I
was able to recognise you and understand you?"
"Why, Hermine? Tell me!"
"Because it's the same for me as for you, because I am alone exactly as you are, because I'm
as little fond of life and men and myself as you are and can put up with them as little. There are
always a few such people who demand the utmost of life and yet cannot come to terms with its
stupidity and crudeness."
"You, you!" I cried in deep amazement. "I understand you, my comrade. No one understands
you better than I. And yet you're a riddle. You are such a past master at life. You have your
wonderful reverence for its little details and enjoyments. You are such an artist in life. How can
you suffer at life's hands? How can you despair?"
"I don't despair. As to suffering—oh, yes, I know all about that! You are surprised that I
should be unhappy when I can dance and am so sure of myself in the superficial things of life.
And I, my friend, am surprised that you are so disillusioned with life when you are at home with
the very things in it that are the deepest and most beautiful, spirit, art, and thought! That is why
we were drawn to one another and why we are brother and sister. I am going to teach you to
dance and play and smile, and still not be happy. And you are going to teach me to think and to
know and yet not be happy. Do you know that we are both children of the devil?"
"Yes, that is what we are. The devil is the spirit, and we are his unhappy children. We have
fallen out of nature and hang suspended in space. And that reminds me of something. In the
Steppenwolf treatise that I told you about, there is something to the effect that it is only a fancy
of his to believe that he has one soul, or two, that he is made up of one or two personalities.
Every human being, it says, consists of ten, or a hundred, or a thousand souls."
"I like that very much," cried Hermine. "In your case, for example, the spiritual part is very
highly developed, and so you are very backward in all the little arts of living. Harry, the thinker,
is a hundred years old, but Harry, the dancer, is scarcely half a day old. It's he we want to bring
on, and all his little brothers who are just as little and stupid and stunted as he is."
She looked at me, smiling; and then asked softly in an altered voice:
"And how did you like Maria, then?"
"Maria? Who is she?"
"The girl you danced with. She is a lovely girl, a very lovely girl. You were a little smitten
with her, as far as I could see."
"You know her then?"
"Oh, yes, we know each other well. Were you very much taken with her?"
"I liked her very much, and I was delighted that she was so indulgent about my dancing."
"As if that were the whole story! You ought to make love to her a little, Harry. She is very
pretty and such a good dancer, and you are in love with her already, I know very well. You'll
succeed with her, I'm sure."
"Believe me, I have no such aspiration."
"Now you're lying a little. Of course, I know that you have an attachment. There is a girl
somewhere or other whom you see once or twice a year in order to have a quarrel with her. Of
course, it's very charming of you to wish to be true to this estimable friend of yours, but you
must permit me not to take it so very seriously. I suspect you of taking love frightfully seriously.
That is your own affair. You can love as much as you like in your ideal fashion, for all I care. All
I have to worry about is that you should learn to know a little more of the little arts and lighter

sides of life. In this sphere, I am your teacher, and I shall be a better one than your ideal love
ever was, you may be sure of that! It's high time you slept with a pretty girl again, Steppenwolf."
"Hermine," I cried in torment, "you have only to look at me, I am an old man!"
"You're a child. You were too lazy to learn to dance till it was nearly too late, and in the same
way you were too lazy to learn to love. As for ideal and tragic love, that, I don't doubt, you can
do marvellously—and all honor to you. Now you will learn to love a little in an ordinary human
way. We have made a start. You will soon be fit to go to a ball, but you must know the Boston
first, and we'll begin on that tomorrow. I'll come at three. How did you like the music, by the
way?"
"Very much indeed."
"Well, there's another step forward, you see. Up to now you couldn't stand all this dance and
jazz music. It was too superficial and frivolous for you. Now you have seen that there's no need
to take it seriously and that it can all the same be very agreeable and delightful. And, by the way,
the whole orchestra would be nothing without Pablo. He conducts it and puts fire into it."
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Just as the gramophone contaminated the esthetic and intellectual atmosphere of my study and
just as the American dances broke in as strangers and disturbers, yes, and as destroyers, into my
carefully tended garden of music, so, too, from all sides there broke in new and dreaded and
disintegrating influences upon my life that, till now, bad been so sharply marked off and so
deeply secluded. The Steppenwolf treatise, and Hermine too, were right in their doctrine of the
thousand souls. Every day new souls kept springing up beside the host of old ones; making
clamorous demands and creating confusion; and now I saw as clearly as in a picture what an
illusion my former personality had been. The few capacities and pursuits in which I had
happened to be strong had occupied all my attention, and I had painted a picture of myself as a
person who was in fact nothing more than a most refined and educated specialist in poetry, music
and philosophy; and as such I had lived, leaving all the rest of me to be a chaos of potentialities,
instincts and impulses which I found an encumbrance and gave the label of Steppenwolf.
Meanwhile, though cured of an illusion, I found this disintegration of the personality by no
means a pleasant and amusing adventure. On the contrary, it was often exceedingly painful, often
almost intolerable. Often the sound of the gramophone was truly fiendish to my ears in the midst
of surroundings where everything was tuned to so very different a key. And many a time, when I
danced my one step in a stylish restaurant among pleasure seekers and elegant rakes, I felt that I
was a traitor to all that I was bound to hold most sacred. Had Hermine left me for one week
alone I should have fled at once from this wearisome and laughable trafficking with the world of
pleasure. Hermine, however, was always there. Though I might not see her every day, I was all
the same continually under her eye, guided, guarded and counseled—besides, she read all my
mad thoughts of rebellion and escape in my face, and smiled at them.
As the destruction of all that I had called my personality went on, I began to understand, too,
why it was that I had feared death so horribly in spite of all my despair. I began to perceive that
this ignoble horror in the face of death was a part of my old conventional and lying existence.
The late Herr Haller, gifted writer, student of Mozart and Goethe, author of essays upon the
metaphysics of art, upon genius and tragedy and humanity, the melancholy hermit in a cell
encumbered with books, was given over bit by bit to self-criticism and at every point was found
wanting. This gifted and interesting Herr Haller had, to be sure, preached reason and humanity
and had protested against the barbarity of the war; but he had not let himself be stood against a
wall and shot, as would have been the proper consequence of his way of thinking. He had found
some way of accommodating himself; one, of course, that was outwardly reputable and noble,
but still a compromise and no more. He was, further, opposed to the power of capital and yet he
had industrial securities lying at his bank and spent the interest from them without a pang of

conscience. And so it was all through. Harry Haller had, to be sure, rigged himself out finely as
an idealist and contemner of the world, as a melancholy hermit and growling prophet. At bottom,
however, he was a bourgeois who took exception to a life like Hermine's and was much annoyed
over the nights thrown away in a restaurant and the money squandered there, and had them on
his conscience. Instead of longing to be freed and completed, he longed, on the contrary, most
earnestly to get back to those happy times when his intellectual trifling had been his diversion
and brought him fame. Just so those newspaper readers—whom he despised and scorned—
longed to get back to the ideal time before the war, because it was so much more comfortable
than taking a lesson from those who had gone through it. Oh, the devil, he made one sick, this
Herr Haller! And yet I clung to him all the same, or to the mask of him that was already falling
away, clung to his coquetting with the spiritual, to his bourgeois horror of the disorderly and
accidental (to which death, too, belonged) and compared the new Harry—the somewhat timid
and ludicrous dilettante of the dance rooms—scornfully and enviously with the old one in whose
ideal and lying portrait he had since discovered all those fatal characteristics which had upset
him that night so grievously in the professor's print of Goethe. He himself, the old Harry, had
been just such a bourgeois idealization of Goethe, a spiritual champion whose all-too-noble gaze
shone with the unction of elevated thought and humanity, until he was almost overcome by his
own nobleness of mind! The devil! Now, at last, this fine picture stood badly in need of repairs!
The ideal Herr Haller had been lamentably dismantled! He looked like a dignitary who had fallen
among thieves—with his tattered breeches—and he would have shown sense if he had studied
now the rôle that his rags appointed him, instead of wearing them with an air of respectability
and carrying on a whining pretence to lost repute.
I was constantly finding myself in the company of Pablo, the musician, and my estimate of
him had to be revised if only because Hermine liked him so much and was so eager for his
company. Pablo had left on me the impression of a pretty nonentity, a little beau, and somewhat
empty at that, as happy as a child for whom there are no problems, whose joy is to dribble into
his toy trumpet and who is kept quiet with praises and chocolate. Pablo, however, was not
interested in my opinions. They were as indifferent to him as my musical theories. He listened
with friendly courtesy, smiling as he always did; but he refrained all the same from any actual
reply. On the other hand, in spite of this, it seemed that I had aroused his interest. It was clear
that he put himself out to please me and to show me good-will. Once when I showed a certain
irritation, and even ill humor, over one of these fruitless attempts at conversation he looked in
my face with a troubled and sorrowful air and, taking my left hand and stroking it, he offered me
a pinch from his little gold snuffbox. It would do me good. I looked inquiringly at Hermine. She
nodded and I took a pinch. The almost immediate effect was that I became clearer in the head
and more cheerful. No doubt there was cocaine in the powder. Hermine told me that Pablo had
many such drugs, and that he procured them through secret channels. He offered them to his
friends now and then and was a master in the mixing and prescribing of them. He had drugs for
stilling pain, for inducing sleep, for begetting beautiful dreams, lively spirits and the passion of
love.
One day I met him in the street near the quay and he turned at once to accompany me. This
time I succeeded at last in making him talk.
"Herr Pablo," I said to him as he played with his slender ebony and silver walking stick, "you
are a friend of Hermine's and that is why I take an interest in you. But I can't say you make it
easy to get on with you. Several times I have attempted to talk about music with you. It would
have interested me to know your thoughts and opinions, whether they contradicted mine or not,
but you have disdained to make me even the barest reply."
He gave me a most amiable smile and this time a reply was accorded me.
"Well," he said with equanimity, "you see, in my opinion there is no point at all in talking
about music. I never talk about music. What reply, then, was I to make to your very able and just
remarks? You were perfectly right in all you said. But, you see, I am a musician, not a professor,

and I don't believe that, as regards music, there is the least point in being right. Music does not
depend on being right, on having good taste and education and all that."
"Indeed. Then what does it depend on?"
"On making music, Herr Haller, on making music as well and as much as possible and with
all the intensity of which one is capable. That is the point, Monsieur. Though I carried the
complete works of Bach and Haydn in my head and could say the cleverest things about them,
not a soul would be the better for it. But when I take hold of my mouthpiece and play a lively
shimmy, whether the shimmy be good or bad, it will give people pleasure. It gets into their legs
and into their blood. That's the point and that alone. Look at the faces in a dance hall at the
moment when the music strikes up after a longish pause, how eyes sparkle, legs twitch and faces
begin to laugh. That is why one makes music."
"Very good, Herr Pablo. But there is not only sensual music. There is spiritual also. Besides
the music that is actually played at the moment, there is the immortal music that lives on even
when it is not actually being played. It can happen to a man to lie alone in bed and to call to mind
a melody from the Magic Flute or the Matthew Passion, and then there is music without anybody
blowing into a flute or passing a bow across a fiddle."
"Certainly, Herr Haller. Yearning and Valencia are recalled every night by many a lonely
dreamer. Even the poorest typist in her office has the latest one step in her head and taps her keys
in time to it. You are right. I don't grudge all those lonely persons their mute music, whether it's
Yearning or the Magic Flute or Valencia. But where do they get their lonely and mute music
from? They get it from us, the musicians. It must first have been played and heard, it must have
got into the blood, before any one at home in his room can think of it and dream of it."
"Granted," I said coolly, "all the same it won't do to put Mozart and the latest fox trot on the
same level. And it is not one and the same thing whether you play people divine and eternal
music or cheap stuff of the day that is forgotten tomorrow."
When Pablo observed from my tone that I was getting excited, he at once put on his most
amiable expression and touching my arm caressingly he gave an unbelievable softness to his
voice.
"Ah, my dear sir, you may be perfectly right with your levels. I have nothing to say to your
putting Mozart and Haydn and Valencia on what levels you please. It is all one to me. It is not
for me to decide about levels. I shall never be asked about them. Mozart, perhaps, will still be
played in a hundred years and Valencia in two will be played no more—we can well leave that, I
think, in God's hands. God is good and has the span of all our days in his hands and that of every
waltz and fox trot too. He is sure to do what is right. We musicians, however, we must play our
parts according to our duties and our gifts. We have to play what is actually in demand, and we
have to play it as well and as beautifully and as expressively as ever we can."
With a sigh I gave it up. There was no getting past the fellow.
At many moments the old and the new, pain and pleasure, fear and joy were quite oddly
mixed with one another. Now I was in heaven, now in hell, generally in both at once. The old
Harry and the new lived at one moment in bitter strife, at the next in peace. Many a time the old
Harry appeared to be dead and done with, to have died and been buried, and then of a sudden
there he was again, giving orders and tyrannizing and contradictory till the little new young
Harry was silent for very shame and let himself be pushed to the wall. At other times the young
Harry took the old by the throat and squeezed with all his might. There was many a groan, many
a death struggle, many a thought of the razor blade.
Often, however, suffering and happiness broke over me in one wave. One such moment was
when a few days after my first public exhibition of dancing, I went into my bedroom at night and
to my indescribable astonishment, dismay, horror and enchantment found the lovely Maria lying
in my bed.
Of all the surprises that Hermine had prepared for me this was the most violent. For I had not
a moment's doubt that it was she who had sent me this bird of paradise. I had not, as usually,

been with Hermine that evening. I had been to a recital of old church music in the Cathedral, a
beautiful, though melancholy, excursion into my past life, to the fields of my youth, the territory
of my ideal self. Beneath the lofty Gothic of the church whose netted vaulting swayed with a
ghostly life in the play of the sparse lights, I heard pieces by Buxtehude, Pachelbel, Bach and
Haydn. I had gone the old beloved way once more. I had heard the magnificent voice of a Bach
singer with whom, in the old days when we were friends, I had enjoyed many a memorable
musical occasion. The notes of the old music with its external dignity and sanctity had called to
life all the exalted enchantment and enthusiasm of youth. I had sat in the lofty choir, sad and
abstracted, a guest for an hour of this noble and blessed world which once had been my home.
During a Haydn duet the tears had come suddenly to my eyes. I had not waited for the end of the
concert. Dropping the thought I had had of seeing the singer again (what evenings I had once
spent with the artists after such concerts) and stealing away out of the Cathedral, I had wearily
paced the dark and narrow streets, where here and there behind the windows of the restaurants
jazz orchestras were playing the tunes of the life I had now come to live. Oh, what a dull maze of
error I had made of my life!
For long during this night's walk I had reflected upon the significance of my relation to music,
and not for the first time recognized this appealing and fatal relation as the destiny of the entire
German spirit. In the German spirit the matriarchal link with nature rules in the form of the
hegemony of music to an extent unknown in any other people. We intellectuals, instead of
fighting against this tendency like men, and rendering obedience to the spirit, the Logos, the
Word, and gaining a hearing for it, are all dreaming of a speech without words that utters the
inexpressible and gives form to the formless. Instead of playing his part as truly and honestly as
he could, the German intellectual has constantly rebelled against the word and against reason and
courted music. And so the German spirit, carousing in music, in wonderful creations of sound,
and wonderful beauties of feeling and mood that were never pressed home to reality, has left the
greater part of its practical gifts to decay. None of us intellectuals is at home in reality. We are
strange to it and hostile. That is why the part played by intellect even in our own German reality,
in our history and politics and public opinion, has been so lamentable a one. Well, I had often
pondered all this, not without an intense longing sometimes to turn to and do something real for
once, to be seriously and responsibly active instead of occupying myself forever with nothing but
esthetics and intellectual and artistic pursuits. It always ended, however, in resignation, in
surrender to destiny. The generals and the captains of industry were quite right. There was
nothing to be made of us intellectuals. We were a superfluous, irresponsible lot of talented
chatterboxes for whom reality had no meaning. With a curse, I came back to the razor.
So, full of thoughts and the echoes of the music, my heart weighed down with sadness and the
longing of despair for life and reality and sense and all that was irretrievably lost, I had got home
at last; climbed my stairs; put on the light in my sitting room; tried in vain to read; thought of the
appointment which compelled me to drink whisky and dance at the Cecil Bar on the following
evening; thought with malice and bitterness not only of myself, but of Hermine too. She might
have the best and kindest intentions and she might be a wonderful person, but she would have
done better all the same to let me perish instead of drawing me down into this strange, dazzling,
dizzying world of hers where I would always remain a stranger and where my real self pined and
wasted away.
And so I had sadly put out the light and taken myself to my bedroom and sadly begun to
undress; and then I was surprised by an unaccustomed smell. There was a faint aroma of scent,
and looking round I saw the lovely Maria lying in my bed, smiling and a little startled, with large
blue eyes.
"Maria!" I said. And my first thoughts were that my landlady would give me notice when she
knew of it.
"I've come," she said softly. "Are you angry with me?"
"No, no. I see Hermine gave you the key. Isn't that it?"

"Oh, it does make you angry. I'll go again."
"No, lovely Maria, stay! Only, just tonight, I'm very sad. I can't be jolly tonight. Perhaps
tomorrow I'll be better again."
I was bending over her and she took my head in her large firm hands and drawing it down
gave me a long kiss. Then I sat down on the bed beside her and took her hands and asked her to
speak low in case we were heard, and looked at her beautiful full rounded face that lay so
strangely and wonderfully on my pillow like a large flower. She drew my hand slowly to her lips
and laid it beneath the clothes on her warm and evenly breathing breast.
"You don't need to be jolly," she said. "Hermine told me that you had troubles. Any one can
understand that. Tell me, then, do I please you still? The other day, when we were dancing, you
were very much in love with me."
I kissed her eyes, her mouth and neck and breasts. A moment ago I had thought of Hermine
with bitterness and reproach. Now I held her gift in my hands and was thankful. Maria's caresses
did not harm the wonderful music I had heard that evening. They were its worthy fulfillment.
Slowly I drew the clothes from her lovely body till my kisses reached her feet. When I lay down
beside her, her flower face smiled back at me omniscient and bountiful.
During this night by Maria's side I did not sleep much, but my sleep was as deep and peaceful
as a child's. And between sleeping I drank of her beautiful warm youth and heard, as we talked
softly, a number of curious tales about her life and Hermine's. I had never known much of this
side of life. Only in the theatrical world, occasionally, in earlier years had I come across similar
existences—women as well as men who lived half for art and half for pleasure. Now, for the first
time, I had a glimpse into this kind of life, remarkable alike for its singular innocence and
singular corruption. These girls, mostly from poor homes, but too intelligent and too pretty to
give their whole lives to some ill-paid and joyless way of gaining their living, all lived
sometimes on casual work, sometimes on their charm and easy virtue. Now and then, for a
month or two, they sat at a typewriter; at times were the mistresses of well-to-do men of the
world, receiving pocket money and presents; lived at times in furs and motorcars, at other times
in attics, and though a good offer might under some circumstances induce them to marry, they
were not at all eager for it. Many of them had little inclination for love and gave themselves very
unwillingly, and then only for money and at the highest price. Others, and Maria was one of
them, were unusually gifted in love and unable to do without it. They lived solely for love and
besides their official and lucrative friends had other love affairs as well. Assiduous and busy,
care-ridden and light-hearted, intelligent and yet thoughtless, these butterflies lived a life at once
childlike and raffiné; independent, not to be bought by every one, finding their account in good
luck and fine weather, in love with life and yet clinging to it far less than the bourgeois, always
ready to follow a fairy prince to his castle, always certain, though scarcely conscious of it, that a
difficult and sad end was in store for them.
During that wonderful first night and the days that followed Maria taught me much. She
taught me the charming play and delights of the senses, but she gave me, also, new
understanding, new insight, new love. The world of the dance and pleasure resorts, the cinemas,
bars and hotel lounges that for me, the hermit and esthete, had always about it something trivial,
forbidden, and degrading, was for Maria and Hermine and their companions the world pure and
simple. It was neither good nor bad, neither loved nor hated. In this world their brief and eager
lives flowered and faded. They were at home in it and knew all its ways- They loved a
champagne or a special dish at a restaurant as one of us might a composer or poet, and they
lavished the same enthusiasm and rapture and emotion on the latest craze in dances or the
sentimental cloying song of a jazz singer as one of us on Nietzsche or Hamsun. Maria talked to
me about the handsome saxophone player, Pablo, and spoke of an American song that he had
sung them sometimes, and she was so carried away with admiration and love as she spoke of it
that I was far more moved and impressed than by the ecstasies of any highly cultured person
over artistic pleasures of the rarest and most distinguished quality. I was ready to enthuse in

sympathy, be the song what it might. Maria's loving words, her fond and tender looks tore large
gaps in the bulwark of my esthetics. There was to be sure a beauty, one and indivisible, small
and select, that seemed to me, with Mozart at the top, to be above all dispute and doubt, but
where was the limit? Hadn't we all as connoisseurs and critics in our youth been consumed with
love for works of art and for artists that today we regarded with doubt and dismay? Hadn't that
happened to us with Liszt and Wagner, and, to many of us, even with Beethoven? Wasn't the
blossoming of Maria's childish emotion over the song from America just as pure and beautiful an
artistic experience and exalted as far beyond doubt as the rapture of any academic big-wig over
Tristan, or the ecstasy of a conductor over the Ninth Symphony? And didn't this agree
remarkably well with the views of Herr Pablo and prove him right?
Maria too appeared to love the beautiful Pablo extremely.
"He certainly is a beauty," said I. "I like him very much too. But tell me, Maria, how can you
have a fondness for me as well, a tiresome old fellow with no looks, who even has grey hairs and
doesn't play a saxophone and doesn't sing any English love songs?"
"Don't talk so horribly," she scolded. "It is quite natural. I like you too. You, too, have
something nice about you that endears you and marks you out. I wouldn't have you different.
One oughtn't to talk of these things and want them accounted for. Listen, when you kiss my neck
or my ear, I feel that I please you, that you like me. You have a way of kissing as though you
were shy, and that tells me: 'You please him. He is grateful to you for being pretty.' That gives
me great, great pleasure. And then again with another man it's just the opposite that pleases me,
that he kisses me as though he thought little of me and conferred a favor."
Again we fell asleep and again I woke to find my arm still about her, my beautiful, beautiful
flower.
And this beautiful flower, strange to say, continued to be nonetheless the gift that Hermine
had made me. Hermine continued to stand in front of her and to hide her with a mask. Then
suddenly the thought of Erica intervened—my distant, angry love, my poor friend. She was
hardly less pretty than Maria, even though not so blooming; and she was more constrained, and
not so richly endowed in the little arts of making love. She stood a moment before my eyes,
clearly and painfully, loved and deeply woven into my destiny; then fell away again in a deep
oblivion, at a half regretted distance.
And so in the tender beauty of the night many pictures of my life rose before me who for so
long had lived in a poor pictureless vacancy. Now, at the magic touch of Eros, the source of them
was opened up and flowed in plenty. For moments together my heart stood still between delight
and sorrow to find how rich was the gallery of my life, and how thronged the soul of the
wretched Steppenwolf with high eternal stars and constellations. My childhood and my mother
showed in a tender transfiguration like a distant glimpse over mountains into the fathomless
blue; the litany of my friendships, beginning with the legendary Herman, soul-brother of
Hermine, rang out as clear as trumpets; the images of many women floated by me with an
unearthly fragrance like moist sea flowers on the surface of the water, women whom I had loved,
desired and sung, whose love I had seldom won and seldom striven to win. My wife, too,
appeared. I had lived with her many years and she had taught me comradeship, strife and
resignation. In spite of all the shortcomings of our life, my confidence in her remained untouched
up to the very day when she broke out against me and deserted me without warning, sick as I
was in mind and body. And now, as I looked back, I saw how deep my love and trust must have
been for her betrayal to have inflicted so deep and lifelong a wound.
These pictures—there were hundreds of them, with names and without—all came back. They
rose fresh and new out of this night of love, and I knew again, what in my wretchedness I had
forgotten, that they were my life's possession and all its worth. Indestructible and abiding as the
stars, these experiences, though forgotten, could never be erased. Their series was the story of
my life, their starry light the undying value of my being. My life had become weariness. It had
wandered in a maze of unhappiness that led to renunciation and nothingness; it was bitter with

the salt of all human things; yet it had laid up riches, riches to be proud of. It had been for all its
wretchedness a princely life. Let the little way to death be as it might, the kernel of this life of
mine was noble. It had purpose and character and turned not on trifles, but on the stars.
Time has passed and much has happened, much has changed; and I can only remember a little
of all that passed that night, a little of all we said and did in the deep tenderness of love, a few
moments of clear awakening from the deep sleep of love's weariness. That night, however, for
the first time since my downfall gave me back the unrelenting radiance of my own life and made
me recognize chance as destiny once more and see the ruins of my being as fragments of the
divine. My soul breathed once more. My eyes were opened. There were moments when I felt
with a glow that I had only to snatch up my scattered images and raise my life as Harry Haller
and as the Steppenwolf to the unity of one picture, in order to enter myself into the world of
imagination and be immortal. Was not this, then, the goal set for the progress of every human
life?
In the morning, after we had shared breakfast, I had to smuggle Maria from the house. Later
in the same day I took a little room in a neighboring quarter which was designed solely for our
meetings.
True to her duties, Hermine, my dancing mistress, appeared and I had to learn the Boston. She
was firm and inexorable and would not release me from a single lesson, for it was decided that I
was to attend the Fancy Dress Ball in her company. She had asked me for money for her
costume, but she refused to tell me anything about it. To visit her, or even to know where she
lived, was still forbidden me.
This time, about three weeks before the Fancy Dress Ball, was remarkable for its wonderful
happiness. Maria seemed to me to be the first woman I had ever really loved. I had always
wanted mind and culture in the women I had loved, and I had never remarked that even the most
intellectual and, comparatively speaking, educated woman never gave any response to the Logos
in me, but rather constantly opposed it. I took my problems and my thoughts with me to the
company of women, and it would have seemed to me utterly impossible to love a girl for more
than an hour who had scarcely read a book, scarcely knew what reading was, and could not have
distinguished Tschaikovsky from Beethoven. Maria had no education. She had no need of these
circuitous substitutes. Her problems all sprang directly from the senses. All her art and the whole
task she set herself lay in extracting the utmost delight from the senses she had been endowed
with, and from her particular figure, her color, her hair, her voice, her skin, her temperament; and
in employing every faculty, every curve and line and every softest modeling of her body to find
responsive perceptions in her lovers and to conjure up in them an answering quickness of
delight. The first shy dance I had had with her had already told me this much. I had caught the
scent and the charm of a brilliant and carefully cultivated sensibility and had been enchanted by
it. Certainly, too, it was no accident that Hermine, the all-knowing, introduced me to this Maria.
She had the scent and the very significance of summer and of roses.
It was not my fortune to be Maria's only lover, nor even her favorite one. I was one of many.
Often she had no time for me, often only an hour at midday, seldom a night. She took no money
from me. Hermine saw to that. She was glad of presents, however, and when I gave her, perhaps,
a new little purse of red lacquered leather there might be two or three gold pieces inside it. As a
matter of fact, she laughed at me over the red purse. It was charming, but a bargain, and no
longer in fashion. In these matters, about which up to that time I was as little learned as in any
language of the Eskimos, I learned a great deal from Maria. Before all else I learned that these
playthings were not mere idle trifles invented by manufacturers and dealers for the purposes of
gain. They were, on the contrary, a little or, rather, a big world, authoritative and beautiful, many
sided, containing a multiplicity of things all of which had the one and only aim of serving love,
refining the senses, giving life to the dead world around us, endowing it in a magical way with
new instruments of love, from powder and scent to the dancing show, from ring to cigarette case,
from waist-buckle to handbag. This bag was no bag, this purse no purse, flowers no flowers, the

fan no fan. All were the plastic material of love, of magic and delight. Each was a messenger, a
smuggler, a weapon, a battle cry.
I often wondered who it was whom Maria really loved. I think she loved the young Pablo of
the saxophone, with his melancholy black eyes and his long, white, distinguished, melancholy
hands. I should have thought Pablo a somewhat sleepy lover, spoiled and passive, but Maria
assured me that though it took a long time to wake him up he was then more strenuous and
forward and virile than prize fighter or riding master.
In this way I got to know many secrets about this person and that, jazz musicians, actors and
many of the women and girls and men of our circle. I saw beneath the surface of the various
alliances and enmities and by degrees (though I had been such an entire stranger to this world) I
was drawn in and treated with confidence. I learned a good deal about Hermine, too. It was of
Herr Pablo, however, of whom Maria was fond, that I saw the most. At times she, too, availed
herself of his secret drugs and was forever procuring these delights for me also; and Pablo was
always most markedly on the alert to be of service to me. Once he said to me without more ado:
"You are so very unhappy. That is bad. One shouldn't be like that. It makes me sorry. Try a mild
pipe of opium." My opinion of this jolly, intelligent, childlike and, at the same time,
unfathomable person gradually changed. We became friends, and I often took some of his
specifics. He looked on at my affair with Maria with some amusement. Once he entertained us in
his room on the top floor of an hotel in the suburbs. There was only one chair, so Maria and I had
to sit on the bed. He gave us a drink from three little bottles, a mysterious and wonderful
draught. And then when I had got into a very good humor, he proposed, with beaming eyes, to
celebrate a love orgy for three. I declined abruptly. Such a thing was inconceivable to me.
Nevertheless I stole a glance at Maria to see how she took it, and though she at once backed up
my refusal I saw the gleam in her eyes and observed that the renunciation cost her some regret.
Pablo was disappointed by my refusal but not hurt. "Pity," he said. "Harry is too morally minded.
Nothing to be done. All the same it would have been so beautiful, so very beautiful! But I've got
another idea." He gave us each a little opium to smoke, and sitting motionless with open eyes we
all three lived through the scenes that he suggested to us while Maria trembled with delight. As I
felt a little unwell after this, Pablo laid me on the bed and gave me some drops, and while I lay
with closed eyes I felt the fleeting breath of a kiss on each eyelid. I took the kiss as though I
believed it came from Maria, but I knew very well it came from him.
And one evening he surprised me still more. Coming to me in my room he told me that he
needed twenty francs and would I oblige him? In return he offered that I instead of him should
have Maria for the night.
"Pablo," I said, very much shocked, "you don't know what you say. Barter for a woman is
counted among us as the last degradation. I have not heard your proposal, Pablo."
He looked at me with pity. "You don't want to, Herr Harry. Very good. You're always making
difficulties for yourself. Don't sleep tonight with Maria if you would rather not. But give me the
money all the same. You shall have it back. I have urgent need of it."
"What for?"
"For Agostino, the little second violin, you know. He has been ill for a week and there's no
one to look after him. He hasn't a sou, nor have I at the moment."
From curiosity and also partly to punish myself, I went with him to Agostino. He took milk
and medicine to him in his attic, and a wretched one it was. He made his bed and aired the room
and made a most professional compress for the fevered head, all quickly and gently and
efficiently like a good sick nurse. The same evening I saw him playing till dawn in the City Bar.
I often talked at length and in detail about Maria with Hermine, about her hands and shoulders
and hips and her way of laughing and kissing and dancing.
"Has she shown you this?" asked Hermine on one occasion, describing to me a peculiar play
of the tongue in kissing. I asked her to show it me herself, but she was most earnest in her
refusal. "That is for later. I am not your love yet."

I asked her how she was acquainted with Maria's ways of kissing and with many secrets as
well that could be known only to her lovers.
"Oh," she cried, "we're friends, after all. Do you think we'd have secrets from one another? I
must say you've got hold of a beautiful girl. There's no one like her."
"All the same, Hermine, I'm sure you have some secrets from each other, or have you told her
everything you know about me?"
"No, that's another matter. Those are things she would not understand. Maria is wonderful.
You are fortunate. But between you and me there are things she has not a notion of. Naturally I
told her a lot about you, much more than you would have liked at the time. I had to win her for
you, you see. But neither Maria nor anyone else will ever understand you as I understand you.
I've learned something about you from her besides, for she's told me all about you as far as she
knows you at all. I know you nearly as well as if we had often slept together."
It was curious and mysterious to know, when I was with Maria again, that she had had
Hermine in her arms just as she had me ... New, indirect and complicated relations rose before
me, new possibilities in love and life; and I thought of the thousand souls of the Steppenwolf
treatise.
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

In the short interval between the time that I got to know Maria and the Fancy Dress Ball I was
really happy; and yet I never had the feeling that this was my release and the attainment of
felicity. I had the distinct impression, rather, that all this was a prelude and a preparation, that
everything was pushing eagerly forward, that the gist of the matter was to come.
I was now so proficient in dancing that I felt quite equal to playing my part at the Ball of
which everybody was talking. Hermine had a secret. She took the greatest care not to let out
what her costume was to be. I would recognize her soon enough, she said, and should I fail to do
so, she would help me; but beforehand I was to know nothing. She was not in the least
inquisitive to know my plans for a fancy dress and I decided that I should not wear a costume at
all. Maria, when I asked her to go with me as my partner, explained that she had a cavalier
already and a ticket too, in fact; and I saw with some disappointment that I should have to attend
the festivity alone. It was the principal Fancy Dress Ball of the town, organized yearly by the
Society of Artists in the Globe Rooms.
During these days I saw little of Hermine, but the day before the Ball she paid me a brief visit.
She came for her ticket, which I had got for her, and sat quietly with me for a while in my room.
We fell into a conversation so remarkable that it made a deep impression on me.
"You're really doing splendidly," she said. "Dancing suits you. Anyone who hadn't seen you
for the last four weeks would scarcely know you."
"Yes," I agreed. "Things haven't gone so well with me for years. That's all your doing,
Hermine."
"Oh, not the beautiful Maria's?"
"No. She is a present from you like all the rest. She is wonderful."
"She is just the girl you need, Steppenwolf—pretty, young, light hearted, an expert in love
and not to be had every day. If you hadn't to share her with others, if she weren't always merely a
fleeting guest, it would be another matter."
Yes, I had to concede this too.
"And so have you really got everything you want now?"
"No, Hermine. It is not like that. What I have got is very beautiful and delightful, a great
pleasure, a great consolation. I'm really happy—"
"Well then, what more do you want?"
"I do want more. I am not content with being happy. I was not made for it. It is not my
destiny. My destiny is the opposite."

"To be unhappy in fact? Well, you've had that and to spare, that time when you couldn't go
home because of the razor."
"No, Hermine, it is something else. That time, I grant you, I was very unhappy. But it was a
stupid unhappiness that led to nothing."
"Why?"
"Because I should not have had that fear of death when I wished for it all the same. The
unhappiness that I need and long for is different. It is of the kind that will let me suffer with
eagerness and lust after death. That is the unhappiness, or happiness, that I am waiting for."
"I understand that. There we are brother and sister. But what have you got against the
happiness that you have found now with Maria? Why aren't you content?"
"I have nothing against it. Oh, no, I love it. I'm grateful for it. It is as lovely as a sunny day in
a wet summer. But I suspect that it can't last. This happiness leads to nothing either. It gives
content, but content is no food for me. It lulls the Steppenwolf to sleep and satiates him. But it is
not a happiness to die for."
"So it's necessary to be dead, Steppenwolf?"
"I think so, yes. My happiness fills me with content and I can bear it for a long while yet. But
sometimes when happiness leaves a moment's leisure to look about me and long for things, the
longing I have is not to keep this happiness forever, but to suffer once again, only more
beautifully and less meanly than before. I long for the sufferings that make me ready and willing
to die."
Hermine looked tenderly in my eyes with that dark look that could so suddenly come into her
face. Lovely, fearful eyes! Picking her words one by one and piecing them together, and
speaking slowly and so low that it was an effort to hear her, she said:
"I want to tell you something today, something that I have known for a long while, and you
know it too; but perhaps you have never said it to yourself. I am going to tell you now what it is
that I know about you and me and our fate. You, Harry, have been an artist and a thinker, a man
full of joy and faith, always on the track of what is great and eternal, never content with the
trivial and petty. But the more life has awakened you and brought you back to yourself, the
greater has your need been and the deeper the sufferings and dread and despair that have
overtaken you, till you were up to your neck in them. And all that you once knew and loved and
revered as beautiful and sacred, all the belief you once had in mankind and our high destiny, has
been of no avail and has lost its worth and gone to pieces. Your faith found no more air to
breathe. And suffocation is a hard death. Is that true, Harry? Is that your fate?"
I nodded again and again.
"You have a picture of life within you, a faith, a challenge, and you were ready for deeds and
sufferings and sacrifices, and then you became aware by degrees that the world asked no deeds
and no sacrifices of you whatever, and that life is no poem of heroism with heroic parts to play
and so on, but a comfortable room where people are quite content with eating and drinking,
coffee and knitting, cards and wireless. And whoever wants more and has got it in him—the
heroic and the beautiful, and the reverence for the great poets or for the saints—is a fool and a
Don Quixote. Good. And it has been just the same for me, my friend. I was a gifted girl. I was
meant to live up to a high standard, to expect much of myself and do great things. I could have
played a great part. I could have been the wife of a king, the beloved of a revolutionary, the sister
of a genius, the mother of a martyr. And life has allowed me just this, to be a courtesan of fairly
good taste, and even that has been hard enough. That is how things have gone with me. For a
while I was inconsolable and for a long time I put the blame on myself. Life, thought I, must in
the end be in the right, and if life scorned my beautiful dreams, so I argued, it was my dreams
that were stupid and wrong headed. But that did not help me at all. And as I had good eyes and
ears and was a little inquisitive too, I took a good look at this so-called life and at my neighbors
and acquaintances, fifty or so of them and their destinies, and then I saw you. And I knew that
my dreams had been right a thousand times over, just as yours had been. It was life and reality

that were wrong. It was as little right that a woman like me should have no other choice than to
grow old in poverty and in a senseless way at a typewriter in the pay of a money-maker, or to
marry such a man for his money's sake, or to become some kind of drudge, as for a man like you
to be forced in his loneliness and despair to have recourse to a razor. Perhaps the trouble with me
was more material and moral and with you more spiritual—but it was the same road. Do you
think I can't understand your horror of the fox trot, your dislike of bars and dancing floors, your
loathing of jazz and the rest of it? I understand it only too well, and your dislike of politics as
well, your despondence over the chatter and irresponsible antics of the parties and the press, your
despair over the war, the one that has been and the one that is to be, over all that people
nowadays think, read and build, over the music they play, the celebrations they hold, the
education they carry on. You are right, Steppenwolf, right a thousand times over, and yet you
must go to the wall. You are much too exacting and hungry for this simple, easygoing and easily
contented world of today. You have a dimension too many. Whoever wants to live and enjoy his
life today must not be like you and me. Whoever wants music instead of noise, joy instead of
pleasure, soul instead of gold, creative work instead of business, passion instead of foolery, finds
no home in this trivial world of ours—"
She looked down and fell into meditation.
"Hermine," I cried tenderly, "sister, how clearly you see! And yet you taught me the fox trot!
But how do you mean that people like us with a dimension too many cannot live here? What
brings it about? Is it only so in our days, or was it so always?"
"I don't know. For the honor of the world, I will suppose it to be in our time only—a disease,
a momentary misfortune. Our leaders strain every nerve, and with success, to get the next war
going, while the rest of us, meanwhile, dance the fox trot, earn money and eat chocolates—in
such a time the world must indeed cut a poor figure. Let us hope that other times were better, and
will be better again, richer, broader and deeper. But that is no help to us now. And perhaps it has
always been the same—"
"Always as it is today? Always a world only for politicians, profiteers, waiters and pleasureseekers, and not a breath of air for men?"
"Well, I don't know. Nobody knows. Anyway, it is all the same. But I am thinking now of
your favorite of whom you have talked to me sometimes, and read me, too, some of his letters, of
Mozart. How was it with him in his day? Who controlled things in his times and ruled the roost
and gave the tone and counted for something? Was it Mozart or the business people, Mozart or
the average man? And in what fashion did he come to die and be buried? And perhaps, I mean, it
has always been the same and always will be, and what is called history at school, and all we
learn by heart there about heroes and geniuses and great deeds and fine emotions, is all nothing
but a swindle invented by the schoolmasters for educational reasons to keep children occupied
for a given number of years. It has always been so and always will be. Time and the world,
money and power belong to the small people and the shallow people. To the rest, to the real men
belongs nothing. Nothing but death."
"Nothing else?"
"Yes, eternity."
"You mean a name, and fame with posterity?"
"No, Steppenwolf, not fame. Has that any value? And do you think that all true and real men
have been famous and known to posterity?"
"No, of course not."
"Then it isn't fame. Fame exists in that sense only for the schoolmasters. No, it isn't fame. It is
what I call eternity. The pious call it the kingdom of God. I say to myself: all we who ask too
much and have a dimension too many could not contrive to live at all if there were not another
air to breathe outside the air of this world, if there were not eternity at the back of time; and this
is the kingdom of truth. The music of Mozart belongs there and the poetry of your great poets.
The saints, too, belong there, who have worked wonders and suffered martyrdom and given a

great example to men. But the image of every true act, the strength of every true feeling, belongs
to eternity just as much, even though no one knows of it or sees it or records it or hands it down
to posterity. In eternity there is no posterity."
"You are right."
"The pious," she went on meditatively, "after all know most about this. That is why they set
up the saints and what they call the communion of the saints. The saints, these are the true men,
the younger brothers of the Savior. We are with them all our lives long in every good deed, in
every brave thought, in every love. The communion of the saints, in earlier times it was set by
painters in a golden heaven, shining, beautiful and full of peace, and it is nothing else but what I
meant a moment ago when I called it eternity. It is the kingdom on the other side of time and
appearances. It is there we belong. There is our home. It is that which our heart strives for. And
for that reason, Steppenwolf, we long for death. There you will find your Goethe again and
Novalis and Mozart, and I my saints, Christopher, Philip of Neri and all. There are many saints
who at first were sinners. Even sin can be a way to saintliness, sin and vice. You will laugh at
me, but I often think that even my friend Pablo might be a saint in hiding. Ah, Harry, we have to
stumble, through so much dirt and humbug before we reach home. And we have no one to guide
us. Our only guide is our homesickness."
With the last words her voice had sunk again and now there was a stillness of peace in the
room. The sun was setting; it lit up the gilt lettering on the back of my books. I took Hermine's
head in my hands and kissed her on the forehead and leaned my cheek to hers as though she were
my sister, and so we stayed for a moment. And so I should have liked best to stay and to have
gone out no more that day. But Maria had promised me this night, the last before the great Ball.
But on my way to join Maria I thought, not of her, but of what Hermine had said. It seemed to
me that it was not, perhaps, her own thoughts but mine. She had read them like a clairvoyant,
breathed them in and given them back, so that they had a form of their own and came to me as
something new. I was particularly thankful to her for having expressed the thought of eternity
just at this time. I needed it, for without it I could not live and neither could I die. The sacred
sense of beyond, of timelessness, of a world which had an eternal value and the substance of
which was divine had been given back to me today by this friend of mine who taught me
dancing.
I was forced to recall my dream of Goethe and that vision of the old wiseacre when he
laughed so inhumanly and played his joke on me in the fashion of the immortals. For the first
time I understood Goethe's laughter, the laughter of the immortals. It was a laughter without an
object. It was simply light and lucidity. It was that which is left over when a true man has passed
through all the sufferings, vices, mistakes, passions and misunderstandings of men and got
through to eternity and the world of space And eternity was nothing else than the redemption of
time, its return to innocence, so to speak, and its transformation again into space.
I went to meet Maria at the place where we usually dined. However, she had not arrived, and
while I sat waiting at the table in the quiet and secluded restaurant, my thoughts still ran on the
conversation I had had with Hermine. All these thoughts that had arisen between her and me
seemed so intimate and well known, fashioned from a mythology and an imagery so entirely my
own. The immortals, living their life in timeless space, enraptured, re-fashioned and immersed in
a crystalline eternity like ether, and the cool starry brightness and radiant serenity of this world
outside the earth—whence was all this so intimately known? As I reflected, passages of Mozart's
Cassations, of Bach's Well-tempered Clavier came to my mind and it seemed to me that all
through this music there was the radiance of this cool starry brightness and the quivering of this
clearness of ether. Yes, it was there. In this music there was a feeling as of time frozen into
space, and above it there quivered a never-ending and superhuman serenity, an eternal, divine
laughter. Yes, and how well the aged Goethe of my dreams fitted in too! And suddenly I heard
this fathomless laughter around me. I heard the immortals laughing. I sat entranced. Entranced, I
felt for a pencil in my waistcoat pocket, and looking for paper saw the wine card lying on the

table. I turned it over and wrote on the back. I wrote verses and forgot about them till one day I
discovered them in my pocket. They ran:
THE IMMORTALS
Ever reeking from the vales of earth
Ascends to us life's fevered surge,
Wealth's excess, the rage of dearth,
Smoke of death meals on the gallow's verge;
Greed without end, imprisoned air;
Murderers' hands, usurers' hands, hands of prayer;
Exhales in foetid breath the human swarm
Whipped on by fear and lust, blood raw, blood warm,
Breathing blessedness and savage heats,
Eating itself and spewing what it eats,
Hatching war and lovely art,
Decking out with idiot craze
Bawdy houses while they blaze,
Through the childish fair-time mart
Weltering to its own decay
In the glare of pleasure's way,
Rising for each newborn and then
Sinking for each to dust again.
But we above you ever more residing
In the ether's star translumined ice
Know not day nor night nor time's dividing,
Wear nor age nor sex for our device.
All your sins and anguish self-affrighting,
Your murders and lascivious delighting
Are to us but as a show
Like the suns that circling go,
Changing not our day for night;
On your frenzied life we spy,
And refresh ourselves thereafter
With the stars in order fleeing;
Our breath is winter; in our sight
Fawns the dragon of the sky;
Cool and unchanging is our eternal being,
Cool and star bright is our eternal laughter.
Then Maria came and after a cheerful meal I accompanied her to our little room. She was
lovelier that evening, warmer and more intimate than she had ever been. The love she gave me
was so tender that I felt it as the most complete abandon. "Maria," said I, "you are as prodigal
today as a goddess. Don't kill us both quite. Tomorrow after all is the Ball. Whom have you got
for a cavalier tomorrow? I'm very much afraid it is a fairy prince who will carry you off and I
shall never see you any more. Your love tonight is almost like that of good lovers who bid each
other farewell for the last time."
She put her lips close to my ear and whispered:
"Don't say that, Harry. Any time might be the last time. If Hermine takes you, you will come
no more to me. Perhaps she will take you tomorrow."

Never did I experience the feeling peculiar to those days, that strange, bitter-sweet alternation
of mood, more powerfully than on that night before the Ball. It was happiness that I experienced.
There was the loveliness of Maria and her surrender. There was the sweet and subtle sensuous
joy of inhaling and tasting a hundred pleasures of the senses that I had only begun to know as an
elderly man. I was bathed in sweet joy like a rippling pool. And yet that was only the shell.
Within all was significant and tense with fate, and while, love-lost and tender, I was busied with
the little sweet appealing things of love and sank apparently without a care in the caress of
happiness, I was conscious all the while in my heart how my fate raced on at breakneck speed,
racing and chasing like a frightened horse, straight for the precipitous abyss, spurred on by dread
and longing to the consummation of death. Just as a short while before I had started aside in fear
from the easy thoughtless pleasure of merely sensual love and felt a dread of Maria's beauty that
laughingly offered itself, so now I felt a dread of death, a dread, however, that was already
conscious of its approaching change into surrender and release.
Even while we were lost in the silent and deep preoccupation of our love and belonged more
closely than ever we had to one another, my soul bid adieu to Maria, and took leave of all that
she had meant to me. I had learned from her, once more before the end, to confide myself like a
child to life's surface play, to pursue a fleeting joy, and to be both child and beast in the
innocence of sex, a state that (in earlier life) I had only known rarely and as an exception. The
life of the senses and of sex had nearly always had for me the bitter accompaniment of guilt, the
sweet but dread taste of forbidden fruit that puts a spiritual man on his guard. Now, Hermine and
Maria had shown me this garden in its innocence, and I had been a guest there and thankfully.
But it would soon be time to go on farther. It was too agreeable and too warm in this garden. It
was my destiny to make another bid for the crown of life in the expiation of its endless guilt. An
easy life, an easy love, an easy death—these were not for me.
From what the girls told me I gathered that for the Ball next day, or in connection with it,
quite unusual delights and extravagances were on foot. Perhaps it was the climax, and perhaps
Maria's suspicion was correct. Perhaps this was our last night together and perhaps the morning
would bring a new unwinding of fate. I was aflame with longing and breathless with dread; I
clung wildly to Maria; and there flared within me a last burst of wild desire...
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

I made up by day for the sleep I had lost at night. After a bath I went home dead tired. I
darkened my bedroom and as I undressed I came on the verses in my pocket; but I forgot them
again and lay down forthwith. I forgot Maria and Hermine and the Masked Ball and slept the
clock round. It was not till I had got up in the evening and was shaving that I remembered that
the Ball began in an hour and that I had to find a dress shirt. I got myself ready in very good
humor and went out thereafter to have dinner.
It was the first masked ball I was to participate in. In earlier days, it is true, I had now and
again attended such festivities and even sometimes found them very entertaining, but I had never
danced. I had been a spectator merely. As for the enthusiasm with which others had talked and
rejoiced over them in my hearing, it had always struck me as comic. And now the day had come
for me too to find the occasion one of almost painful suspense. As I had no partner to take, I
decided not to go till late. This, too, Hermine had counseled me.
I had seldom of late been to the Steel Helmet, my former refuge, where the disappointed men
sat out their evenings, soaking in their wine and playing at bachelor life. It did not suit the life I
had come to lead since. This evening, however, I was drawn to it before I was aware. In the
mood between joy and fear that fate and parting imposed on me just now, all the stations and
shrines of meditation in my life's pilgrimage caught once more that gleam of pain and beauty that
comes from things past; and so too had the little tavern, thick with smoke, among whose patrons
I had lately been numbered and whose primitive opiate of a bottle of cheap wine had lately

heartened me enough to spend one more night in my lonely bed and to endure life for one more
day. I had tasted other specifics and stronger stimulus since then, and sipped a sweeter poison.
With a smile I entered the ancient hostel. The landlady greeted me and so, with a nod, did the
silent company of habitués. A roast chicken was commended and soon set before me. The limpid
Elsasser sparkled in the thick peasant glass. The clean white wooden tables and the old yellow
paneling had a friendly look. And while I ate and drank there came over me that feeling of
change and decay and of farewell celebrations, that sweet and inwardly painful feeling of being a
living part of all the scenes and all the things of an earlier life that has never yet been parted
from, and from which the time to part has come. The modern man calls this sentimentality. He
has lost the love of inanimate objects. He does not even love his most sacred object, his
motorcar, but is ever hoping to exchange it as soon as he can for a later model. This modern man
has energy and ability. He is healthy, cool and strenuous—a splendid type, and in the next war
he will be a miracle of efficiency. But all that was no concern of mine. I was not a modern man,
nor an old-fashioned one either. I had escaped time altogether, and went my way, with death at
my elbow and death as my resolve. I bad no objection to sentimentalities. I was glad and
thankful to find a trace of anything like a feeling still remaining in my burned-out heart. So I let
my memories of the old tavern and my attachment to the solid wooden chairs and the smell of
smoke and wine and the air of use and wont and warmth and homeliness that the place had carry
me away. There is beauty in farewells and a gentleness in their very tone. The hard seat was dear
to me, and so was the peasant glass and the cool racy taste of the Elsasser and my intimacy with
all and everything in this room, and the faces of the bent and dreaming drinkers, those
disillusioned ones, whose brother I had been for so long. All this was bourgeois sentimentality,
lightly seasoned with a touch of the old-fashioned romance of inns, a romance coming from my
boyhood when inns and wine and cigars were still forbidden things—strange and wonderful. But
no Steppenwolf rose before me baring his teeth to tear my sentiment to pieces. I sat there in
peace in the glow of the past whose setting still shed a faint afterglow.
A street seller came in and I bought a handful of roasted chestnuts. An old woman came in
with flowers and I bought a bunch of violets and presented them to the landlady. It was not till I
was about to pay my bill and felt in vain for the pocket of the coat I usually wore that I realized
once more that I was in evening dress. The Masked Ball. And Hermine!
It was still early enough, however. I could not convince myself to go to the Globe Rooms
straight away. I felt too—as I had in the case of all the pleasures that had lately come my way—a
whole array of checks and resistances. I had no inclination to enter the large and crowded and
noisy rooms. I had a schoolboy's shyness of the strange atmosphere and the world of pleasure
and dancing.
As I sauntered along I passed by a cinema with its dazzling lights and huge colored posters. I
went on a few steps, then turned again and went in. There till eleven I could sit quietly and
comfortably in the dark. Led by the usher's flashlight I stumbled through the curtains into the
darkened hall, found a seat and was suddenly in the middle of the Old Testament. The film was
one of those that are nominally not shown for money. Much expense and many refinements are
lavished upon them in a more sacred and nobler cause, and at midday even school-children are
brought to see them by their religious teachers. This one was the story of Moses and the
Israelites in Egypt, with a huge crowd of men, horses, camels, palaces, splendors of the pharaohs
and tribulations of the Jews in the desert. I saw Moses, whose hair recalled portraits of Walt
Whitman, a splendidly theatrical Moses, wandering through the desert at the head of the Jews,
with a dark and fiery eye and a long staff and the stride of a Wotan. I saw him pray to God at the
edge of the Red Sea, and I saw the Red Sea parted to give free passage, a deep road between
piled-up mountains of water (the confirmation classes conducted by the clergy to see this
religious film could argue without end as to how the film people managed this). I saw the
prophet and his awestruck people pass through to the other side, and behind them I saw the war
chariots of Pharaoh come into sight and the Egyptians stop and start on the brink of the sea, and

then, when they ventured courageously on, I saw the mountainous waters close over the heads of
Pharaoh in all the splendor of his gold trappings and over all his chariots and all his men,
recalling, as I saw it, Handel's wonderful duet for two basses in which this event is magnificently
sung. I saw Moses, further, climbing Sinai, a gloomy hero in a gloomy wilderness of rocks, and I
looked on as Jehovah in the midst of storm and thunder and lightning imparted the Ten
Commandments to him, while his worthless people set up the golden calf at the foot of the
mountain and gave themselves over to somewhat roisterous celebrations. I found it so strange
and incredible to be looking on at all this, to be seeing the sacred writ, with its heroes and its
wonders, the source in our childhood of the first dawning suspicion of another world than this,
presented for money before a grateful public that sat quietly eating the provisions brought with it
from home. A nice little picture, indeed, picked up by chance in the huge wholesale clearance of
culture in these days! My God, rather than come to such a pass it would have been better for the
Jews and every one else, let alone the Egyptians, to have perished in those days and forthwith of
a violent and becoming death instead of this dismal pretence of dying by inches that we go in for
today. Yes indeed!
My secret repressions and unconfessed fright in face of the Masked Ball were by no means
lessened by the feelings provoked in me by the cinema. On the contrary, they had grown to
uncomfortable proportions and I had to shake myself and think of Hermine before I could go to
the Globe Rooms and dared to enter. It was late, and the Ball had been for a long time in full
swing. At once before I had even taken off my things I was caught up, shy and sober as I was, in
the swirl of the masked throng. I was accosted familiarly. Girls summoned me to the champagne
rooms. Clowns slapped me on the back, and I was addressed on all sides as an old friend. I
responded to none of it, but fought my way through the crowded rooms to the cloakroom, and
when I got my cloakroom ticket I put it in my pocket with great care, reflecting that I might need
it before very long when I had had enough of the uproar.
Every part of the great building was given over to the festivities. There was dancing in every
room and in the basement as well. Corridors and stairs were filled to overflowing with masks and
dancing and music and laughter and tumult. Oppressed in heart I stole through the throng, from
the Negro orchestra to the peasant band, from the large and brilliantly lighted principal room into
the passages and on to the stairs, to bars, buffets and champagne parlors. The walls were mostly
hung with wild and cheerful paintings by the latest artists. All the world was there, artists,
journalists, professors, business men, and of course every adherent of pleasure in the town. In
one of the orchestras sat Pablo, blowing with enthusiasm in his curved mouthpiece. As soon as
he saw me he sang out a greeting. Pushed hither and thither in the crowd I found myself in one
room after another, upstairs here and downstairs there. A corridor in the basement had been
staged as hell by the artists and there a band of devils played furiously. After a while, I began to
look for Hermine or Maria and strove time after time to reach the principal room; but either I
missed my way or had to meet the current. By midnight I had found no one, and though I had not
danced I was hot and giddy. I threw myself into the nearest chair among utter strangers and
ordered some wine, and came to the conclusion that joining in such rowdy festivals was no part
for an old man like me. I drank my glass of wine while I stared at the naked arms and backs of
the women, watched the crowd of grotesquely masked figures drifting by and silently declined
the advances of a few girls who wished to sit on my knee or get me to dance. "Old Growler," one
called after me; and she was right. I decided to raise my spirits with the wine, but even the wine
went against me and I could scarcely swallow a second glass. And then the feeling crept over me
that the Steppenwolf was standing behind me with his tongue out. Nothing pleased me. I was in
the wrong place. To be sure, I had come with the best intentions, but this was no place for me to
be merry in; and all this loud effervescence of pleasure, the laughter and the whole foolery of it
on every side, seemed to me forced and stupid.
Thus it was that, at about one o'clock, in anger and disillusionment I steered a course for the
cloakroom, to put on my coat again and go. It was surrender and backsliding into my

wolfishness, and Hermine would scarcely forgive me for it. But I could not do otherwise. All the
way as I squeezed through the throng to the cloakroom, I still kept a careful lookout in case I
might yet see one of my friends, but in vain. Now I stood at the counter. Already the attendant
was politely extending his hand for my number. I felt in my waistcoat pocket—the number was
no longer there! The devil was in it if even this failed me. Often enough during my forlorn
wanderings through the rooms and while I sat over my tasteless wine I had felt in my pocket,
fighting back the resolve to go away again, and I had always found the round flat check in its
place. And now it was gone. Everything was against me.
"Lost your number?" came in a shrill voice from a small red and yellow devil at my elbow.
"Here, comrade, you can take mine," and he held it out to me without more ado. While I
mechanically took it and turned it over in my fingers the brisk little fellow rapidly disappeared.
When, however, I examined the pasteboard counter for a number, no number was to be seen.
Instead there was a scribble in a tiny hand. I asked the attendant to wait and went to the nearest
light to read it. There in little crazy letters that were scarcely legible was scrawled:
TONIGHT AT THE MAGIC THEATER
FOR MADMEN ONLY
PRICE OF ADMITTANCE YOUR MIND.
NOT FOR EVERYBODY.
HER M I N E I S I N H E L L .
As a marionette whose thread the operator has let go for a moment wakes to new life after a
brief paralysis of death and coma and once more plays its lively part, so did I at this jerk of the
magic thread throw myself with the elasticity and eagerness of youth into the tumult from which
I had just retreated in the listlessness and weariness of elderly years. Never did sinner show more
haste to get to hell. A moment before my patent-leather shoes had galled me, the heavily scented
air disgusted me, and the heat undone me. Now on my winged feet I nimbly one-stepped through
every room on the way to hell. The very air had a charm. The warmth embedded me and wafted
me on, and so no less did the riotous music, the intoxication of colors, the perfume of women's
shoulders, the clamor of the hundred tongues, the laughter, the rhythm of the dance, and the
glances of all the kindled eyes. A Spanish dancing girl flung herself into my arms: "Dance with
me!" "Can't," said I. "I'm bound for hell. But I'll gladly take a kiss with me." The red mouth
beneath the mask met mine and with the kiss I recognized Maria. I caught her tight in my arms
and like a June rose bloomed her full lips. By this time we were dancing, our lips still joined.
Past Pablo we danced, who hung like a lover over his softly wailing instrument. Those lovely
animal eyes embraced us with their half-abstracted radiance. But before we had gone twenty
steps the music broke off and regretfully I let go of Maria.
"I'd have loved to have danced with you again," I said, intoxicated with her warmth. "Come
with me a step or two, Maria. I'm in love with your beautiful arm. Let me have it a moment
longer! But, you see, Hermine has summoned me. She is in hell."
"I thought so. Farewell, Harry. I won't forget you." She left me—left me indeed. Yes, it was
autumn, it was fate, that had given the summer rose so full and ripe a scent.
On I went through the long corridors, luxuriously thronged, and down the stairs to hell. There,
on pitch-black walls shone wicked garish lights, and the orchestra of devils was playing
feverishly. On a high stool at the bar there was seated a pretty young fellow without a mask and
in evening dress who scrutinized me with a cursory and mocking glance. Pressed to the wall by
the swirl of dancers—about twenty couples were dancing in this very confined space—I
examined all the women with eager suspense. Most were still in masks and smiled at me, but
none was Hermine. The handsome youth on the high stool glanced mockingly at me. At the next
pause, thought I, she will come and summon me. The dance ended but no one came.
I went over to the bar which was squeezed into a corner of the small and low room, and taking
a seat near the young man ordered a whisky. While I drank it I saw his profile. It had a familiar

charm, like a picture from long ago, precious for the very dust that has settled on it from the past.
Oh, then it flashed through me. It was Herman, the friend of my youth.
"Herman!" I stammered.
She smiled. "Harry? Have you found me?"
It was Hermine, barely disguised by the make-up of her hair and a little paint. The stylish
collar gave an unfamiliar look to the pallor of her intelligent face, the wide black sleeves of her
dress coat and the white cuffs made her hands look curiously small, and the long black trousers
gave a curious elegance to her feet in their black and white silk socks.
"Is this the costume, Hermine, in which you mean to make me fall in love with you?"
"So far," she said, "I have contented myself with turning the heads of the ladies. But now your
turn has come. First, let's have a glass of champagne."
So we did, perched on our stools, while the dance went on around us to the lively and fevered
strain of the strings. And without Hermine appearing to give herself the least trouble I was very
soon in love with her. As she was dressed as a boy, I could not dance with her nor allow myself
any tender advances, and while she seemed distant and neutral in her male mask, her looks and
words and gestures encircled me with all her feminine charm. Without so much as having
touched her I surrendered to her spell, and this spell itself kept within the part she played. It was
the spell of a hermaphrodite. For she talked to me about Herman and about childhood, mine and
her own, and about those years of childhood when the capacity for love, in its first youth,
embraces not only both sexes, but all and everything, sensuous and spiritual, and endows all
things with a spell of love and a fairylike ease of transformation such as in later years comes
again only to a chosen few and to poets, and to them rarely. Throughout she kept up the part of a
young man, smoking cigarettes and talking with a spirited ease that often had a little mockery in
it; and yet it was all iridescent with the rays of desire and transformed, as it reached my senses,
into a charming seduction.
How well and thoroughly I thought I knew Hermine, and yet what a completely new
revelation of herself she opened up to me that night! How gently and inconspicuously she cast
the net I longed for around me, and how playfully and how like a pixie she gave the sweet poison
to drink!
We sat and talked and drank champagne. We strolled through the rooms and looked about us.
We went on voyages of exploration to discover couples whose love-making it amused us to spy
upon. She pointed out women whom she recommended me to dance with, and gave me advice as
to the methods of attack to be employed with each. We took the floor as rivals and paid court for
a while to the same girl, danced with her by turns and both tried to win her heart. And yet it was
all only a carnival, only a game between the two of us that caught us more closely together in our
own passion. It was all a fairy tale. Everything had a new dimension, a deeper meaning.
Everything was fanciful and symbolic. There was one girl of great beauty but looking tragic and
unhappy. Herman danced with her and drew her out. They disappeared to drink champagne
together, and she told me afterwards that she had made a conquest of her not as a man but as a
woman, with the spell of Lesbos. For my part, the whole building reverberated everywhere with
the sound of dancing, and the whole intoxicated crowd of masks, became by degrees a wild
dream of paradise. Flower upon flower wooed me with its scent. I toyed with fruit after fruit.
Serpents looked at me from green and leafy shadows with mesmeric eyes. Lotus blossoms
luxuriated over black bogs. Enchanted birds sang allurement from the trees. Yet all was a
progress to one longed-for goal, the summons of a new yearning for one and one only. Once I
was dancing with a girl I did not know. I had swept her with the ardor of a lover into the giddy
swirl of dancers and while we hung in this unreal world, she suddenly remarked with a laugh:
"One wouldn't know you. You were so dull and flat before." Then I recognized the girl who had
called me "Old Growler" a few hours before. She thought she had got me now, but with the next
dance it was another for whom my ardor glowed. I danced without ceasing for two hours or
more—every dance and some, even, that I had never danced before. Every now and then Herman

was near me, and gave me a nod and a smile as he disappeared in the throng.
An experience fell to my lot this night of the Ball that I had never known in all my fifty years,
though it is known to every flapper and student—the intoxication of a general festivity, the
mysterious merging of the personality in the mass, the mystic union of joy. I had often heard it
spoken of. It was known, I knew, to every servant girl. I had often observed the sparkle in the
eye of those who told me of it and I had always treated it with a half-superior, half-envious
smile. A hundred times in my life I had seen examples of those whom rapture had intoxicated
and released from the self, of that smile, that half-crazed absorption, of those whose heads have
been turned by a common enthusiasm. I had seen it in drunken recruits and sailors, and also in
great artists in the enthusiasm, perhaps, of a musical festival; and not less in young soldiers
going to war. Even in recent days I had marveled at and loved and mocked and envied this gleam
and this smile in my friend, Pablo, when he hung over his saxophone in the blissful intoxication
of playing in the orchestra, or when, enraptured and ecstatic, he looked over to the conductor, the
drum, or the man with the banjo. It had sometimes occurred to me that such a smile, such a
childlike radiance could be possible only to quite young persons or among those peoples whose
customs permitted no marked differences between one individual and another. But today, on this
blessed night, I myself, the Steppenwolf, was radiant with this smile. I myself swam in this deep
and childlike happiness of a fairy tale. I myself breathed the sweet intoxication of a common
dream and of music and rhythm and wine and women—I, who had in other days so often
listened with amusement, or dismal superiority, to its panegyric in the ballroom chatter of some
student. I was myself no longer. My personality was dissolved in the intoxication of the festivity
like salt in water. I danced with this woman or that, but it was not only the one I had in my arms
and whose hair brushed my face that belonged to me. All the other women who were dancing in
the same room and the same dance and to the same music, and whose radiant faces floated past
me like fantastic flowers, belonged to me, and I to them. All of us had a part in one another. And
the men too. I was with them also. They, too, were no strangers to me. Their smile was mine, and
mine their wooing and theirs mine.
A new dance, a fox trot, with the title "Yearning," had swept the world that winter. Once we
had beard it we could not have enough of it. We were all soaked in it and intoxicated with it and
everyone hummed the melody whenever it was played. I danced without stop and with anyone
who came in my way, with quite young girls, with women in their earlier or their later prime, and
with those who had sadly passed them both; and with them all I was enraptured—laughing,
happy, radiant. And when Pablo saw me so radiant, me whom he had always looked on as a very
lamentable poor devil, his eyes beamed blissfully upon me and he was so inspired that he got up
from his chair and blowing lustily in his horn climbed up on it. From this elevation he blew with
all his might, while at the same time his whole body, and his instrument with it, swayed to the
tune of "Yearning." I and my partner kissed our hands to him and sang loudly in response. Ah,
thought I, meanwhile, let come to me what may, for once at least, I, too, have been happy,
radiant, released from myself, a brother of Pablo's, a child.
I had lost the sense of time, and I don't know how many hours or moments the intoxication of
happiness lasted. I did not observe either that the brighter the festal fire burned the narrower
were the limits within which it was confined. Most people had already left. The corridors were
silent and many of the lights out. The stairs were deserted and in the rooms above one orchestra
after another had stopped playing and gone away. It was only in the principal room and in Hell
below that the orgy still raged in a crescendo. Since I could not dance with Hermine as a boy, we
had only had fleeting encounters in the pauses between the dances, and at last I lost sight of her
entirely—and not only sight but thought. There were no thoughts left. I was lost in the maze and
whirl of the dance. Scents and tones and sighs and words stirred me. I was greeted and kindled
by strange eyes, encircled by strange faces, borne hither and thither in time to the music as
though by a wave.
And then of a sudden I saw, half coming to my senses for a moment, among the last who still

kept it up in one of the smaller rooms, and filled it to overflowing—the only one in which the
music still sounded—of a sudden I saw a black Pierrette with face painted white. She was fresh
and charming, the only masked figure left and a bewitching apparition that I had never in the
whole course of the night seen before. While in everyone else the late hour showed itself in
flushed and heated faces, crushed dresses, limp collars and crumpled ruffs, the black Pierrette
stood there fresh and neat with her white face beneath her mask. Her costume had not a crease
and not a hair was out of place. Her ruff and pointed cuffs were untouched. I rushed towards her,
put my arms around her, and drew her into the dance. Her perfumed ruff tickled my chin. Her
hair brushed my cheek. The young vigor of her body answered my movements as no one else's
had done that night, yielding to them with an inward tenderness and compelling them to new
contacts by the play of her allurements. I bent down to kiss her mouth as we danced. Its smile
was triumphant and long familiar. Of a sudden I recognized the firm chin, the shoulders, arms
and hands. It was Hermine, Herman no longer. Hermine in a change of dress, fresh, perfumed,
powdered. Our lips met passionately. For a moment her whole body to her knees clung in
longing and surrender to mine. Then she drew her mouth away and, holding back, fled from me
as we danced. When the music broke off we were still clasped where we stood. All the excited
couples round us clapped, stamped, cried out and urged the exhausted orchestra to play
"Yearning" over again. And now a feeling that it was morning fell upon us all. We saw the ashen
light behind the curtains. It warned us of pleasure's approaching end and gave us symptoms of
the weariness to come. Blindly, with bursts of laughter, we flung ourselves desperately into the
dance once more, into the music and the light that began to flood the room. Our feet moved in
time to the music as though we were possessed, every couple touching, and once more we felt
the great wave of bliss break over us. Hermine abandoned her triumphant air, her mockery and
coolness. She knew that there was no more to do to make me in love with her. I was hers, and
her way of dancing, her looks and smiles and kisses all showed that she gave herself to me. All
the women of this fevered night, all that I had danced with, all whom I had kindled or who had
kindled me, all whom I had courted, all who had clung to me with longing, all whom I had
followed with enraptured eyes were melted together and had become one, the one whom I held
in my arms.
On and on went this nuptial dance. Time after time the music flagged. The winds let their
instruments fall. The pianist got up from the piano. The first fiddle shook his head. And every
time they were won over by the imploring persistence of the last intoxicated dancers and played
once more. They played faster and more wildly. Then at last, as we stood, still entwined and
breathless after the last eager dance, the piano was closed with a bang, and our arms fell wearily
to our sides like those of the winds and strings and the flutist, blinking sleepily, put his flute
away in its case. Doors opened, the cold air poured in, attendants appeared with cloaks and the
bar waiter turned off the light. The whole scene vanished eerily away and the dancers who a
moment ago had been all on fire shivered as they put on coats and cloaks and turned up their
collars. Hermine was pale but smiling. Slowly she raised her arm and pushed back her hair. As
she did so one arm caught the light and a faint and indescribably tender shadow ran from her
armpit to her hidden breast, and this little trembling line of shadow seemed to me to sum up all
the charm and fascination of her body like a smile.
We stood looking at one another, the last in the hall, the last in the whole building.
Somewhere below I heard a door bang, a glass break, a titter of laughter die away, mixed with
the angry hurried noise of motorcars starting up. And somewhere, at an indeterminable distance
and height, I heard a laugh ring out, an extraordinarily clear and merry peal of laughter. Yet it
was eerie and strange. It was a laugh, made of crystal and ice, bright and radiant, but cold and
inexorable. Where had I heard this laugh before? I could not tell.
We stood and looked at one another. For a moment I came to my sober self. I felt a fearful
weariness descend upon me. I felt with repugnance how moist and limp my clothing hung
around me. I saw my hands emerging red and with swollen veins from my crumpled and wilted

cuffs. But all at once the mood passed, banished by a look from Hermine. At this look that
seemed to come from my own soul all reality fell away, even the reality of my sensuous love of
her. Bewitched we looked at one another, while my poor little soul looked at me.
"You're ready?" asked Hermine, and her smile fled away like the shadows on her breast. Far
up in unknown space rang out that strange and eerie laughter.
I nodded. Oh, yes, I was ready.
At this moment Pablo appeared in the doorway and beamed on us out of his jolly eyes that
really were animal's eyes except that animal's eyes are always serious, while his always laughed,
and this laughter turned them into human eyes. He beckoned to us with his usual friendly
cordiality. He had put on a gorgeous silk smoking jacket. His limp collar and tired white face had
a withered and pallid look above its red facings; but the impression was erased by his radiant
black eyes. So was reality erased, for they too had the witchery.
We joined him when he beckoned and in the doorway he said to me in a low voice: "Brother
Harry, I invite you to a little entertainment. For madmen only, and one price only—your mind.
Are you ready?"
Again I nodded.
The dear fellow gave us each an arm with kind solicitude, Hermine his right, me his left, and
conducted us upstairs to a small round room that was lit from the ceiling with a bluish light and
nearly empty. There was nothing in it but a small round table and three easy chairs in which we
sat ourselves.
Where were we? Was I asleep? Was I at home? Was I driving in a car? No, I was sitting in a
blue light in a round room and a rare atmosphere, in a stratum of reality that had become rarefied
in the extreme.
Why then was Hermine so white? Why was Pablo talking so much? Was it not perhaps I who
made him talk, spoke, indeed, with his voice? Was it not, too, my own soul that contemplated me
out of his black eyes like a lost and frightened bird, just as it had out of Hermine's gray ones?
Pablo looked at us good-naturedly as ever and with something ceremonious in his
friendliness; and he talked much and long. He whom I had never heard say two consecutive
sentences, whom no discussion nor thesis could interest, whom I had scarcely credited with a
single thought, discoursed now in his good-natured warm voice fluently and without a fault.
"My friends, I have invited you to an entertainment that Harry has long wished for and of
which he has long dreamed. The hour is a little late and no doubt we are all slightly fatigued. So,
first, we will rest and refresh ourselves a little."
From a recess in the wall he took three glasses and a quaint little bottle, also a small oriental
box inlaid with differently colored woods. He filled the three glasses from the bottle and taking
three long thin yellow cigarettes from the box and a box of matches from the pocket of his silk
jacket he gave us a light. And now we all slowly smoked the cigarettes whose smoke was as
thick as incense, leaning back in our chairs and slowly sipping the aromatic liquid whose strange
taste was so utterly unfamiliar. Its effect was immeasurably enlivening and delightful—as though
one were filled with gas and had no longer any gravity. Thus we sat peacefully exhaling small
puffs and taking little sips at our glasses, while every moment we felt ourselves growing lighter
and more serene.
From far away came Pablo's warm voice.
"It is a pleasure to me, my dear Harry, to have the privilege of being your host in a small way
on this occasion. You have often been sorely weary of your life. You were striving, were you
not, for escape? You have a longing to forsake this world and its reality and to penetrate to a
reality more native to you, to a world beyond time. You know, of course, where this other world
lies hidden. It is the world of your own soul that you seek. Only within yourself exists that other
reality for which you long. I can give you nothing that has not already its being within yourself. I
can throw open to you no picture gallery but your own soul. All I can give you is the
opportunity, the impulse, the key. I can help you to make your own world visible. That is all."

Again he put his hand into the pocket of his gorgeous jacket and drew out a round looking
glass.
"Look, it is thus that you have so far seen yourself."
He held the little glass before my eyes (a childish verse came to my mind: "Little glass, little
glass in the hand") and I saw, though indistinctly and cloudily, the reflection of an uneasy selftormented, inwardly laboring and seething being—myself, Harry Haller. And within him again I
saw the Steppenwolf, a shy, beautiful, dazed wolf with frightened eyes that smoldered now with
anger, now with sadness. This shape of a wolf coursed through the other in ceaseless movement,
as a tributary pours its cloudy turmoil into a river. In bitter strife, each tried to devour the other
so that his shape might prevail. How unutterably sad was the look this fluid inchoate figure of
the wolf threw from his beautiful shy eyes.
"There you see yourself," Pablo remarked and put the mirror away in his pocket. I was
thankful to close my eyes and take a sip of the elixir.
"And now," said Pablo, "we have had our rest. We have had our refreshment and a little talk.
If your fatigue has passed off I will conduct you to my peep show and show you my little theater.
Will you come?"
We got up. With a smile Pablo led. He opened a door and drew a curtain aside, and we found
ourselves in the horseshoe-shaped corridor of a theater, and exactly in the middle. On either side,
the curving passage led past a large number, indeed an incredible number, of narrow doors into
the boxes.
"This," explained Pablo, "is our theater, and a jolly one it is. I hope you'll find lots to laugh
at." He laughed aloud as he spoke, a short laugh, but it went through me like a shot. It was the
same bright and peculiar laugh that I had heard before from below.
"This little theater of mine has as many doors into as many boxes as you please, ten or a
hundred or a thousand, and behind each door exactly what you seek awaits you. It is a pretty
cabinet of pictures, my dear friend; but it would be quite useless for you to go through it as you
are. You would be checked and blinded at every turn by what you are pleased to call your
personality. You have no doubt guessed long since that the conquest of time and the escape from
reality, or however else it may be that you choose to describe your longing, means simply the
wish to be relieved of your so-called personality. That is the prison where you lie. And if you
were to enter the theater as you are, you would see everything through the eyes of Harry and the
old spectacles of the Steppenwolf. You are therefore requested to lay these spectacles aside and
to be so kind as to leave your highly esteemed personality here in the cloakroom where you will
find it again when you wish. The pleasant dance from which you have just come, the treatise on
the Steppenwolf, and the little stimulant that we have only this moment partaken of may have
sufficiently prepared you. You, Harry, after having left behind your valuable personality, will
have the left side of the theater at your disposal, Hermine the right. Once inside, you can meet
each other as you please. Hermine will be so kind as to go for a moment behind the curtain. I
should like to introduce Harry first."
Hermine disappeared to the right past a gigantic mirror that covered the rear wall from floor
to vaulted ceiling.
"Now, Harry, come along, be as jolly as you can. To make it so and to teach you to laugh is
the whole aim in getting up this entertainment—I hope you will make it easy for me. You feel
quite well, I trust? Not afraid? That's good, excellent. You will now, without fear and with
unfeigned pleasure, enter our visionary world. You will introduce yourself to it by means of a
trifling suicide, since this is the custom."
He took out the pocket mirror again and held it in front of my face. Again I was confronted by
the same indistinct and cloudy reflection, with the wolf's shape encircling it and coursing
through it. I knew it too well and disliked it too sincerely for its destruction to cause me any
sorrow.
"You will now erase this superfluous reflection, my dear friend. That is all that is necessary.

To do so, it will suffice that you greet it, if your mood permits, with a hearty laugh. You are here
in a school of humor. You are to learn to laugh. Now, true humor begins when a man ceases to
take himself seriously."
I fixed my eyes on the little mirror, where the man Harry and the wolf were going through
their convulsions. For a moment there was a convulsion deep within me too, a faint but painful
one like remembrance, or like homesickness, or like remorse. Then the slight oppression gave
way to a new feeling like that a man feels when a tooth has been extracted with cocaine, a sense
of relief and of letting out a deep breath, and of wonder, at the same time, that it has not hurt in
the least. And this feeling was accompanied by a buoyant exhilaration and a desire to laugh so
irresistible that I was compelled to give way to it.
The mournful image in the glass gave a final convulsion and vanished. The glass itself turned
gray and charred and opaque, as though it had been burned. With a laugh Pablo threw the thing
away and it went rolling down the endless corridor and disappeared.
"Well laughed, Harry," cried Pablo. "You will learn to laugh like the immortals yet. You have
done with the Steppenwolf at last. It's no good with a razor. Take care that he stays dead. You'll
be able to leave the farce of reality behind you directly. At our next meeting we'll drink to
brotherhood, dear fellow. I never liked you better than I do today. And if you still think it worth
your while we can philosophize together and argue and talk about music and Mozart and Gluck
and Plato and Goethe to your heart's content. You will understand now why it was so impossible
before. I wish you good riddance of the Steppenwolf for today at any rate. For naturally, your
suicide is not a final one. We are in a magic theater; a world of pictures, not realities. See that
you pick out beautiful and cheerful ones and show that you really are not in love with your
highly questionable personality any longer. Should you still, however, have a hankering after it,
you need only have another look in the mirror that I will now show you. But you know the old
proverb: 'A mirror in the hand is worth two on the wall.' Ha! ha!" (Again that laugh, beautiful
and frightful!) "And now there only remains one little ceremony and quite a jolly one. You have
now to cast aside the spectacles of your personality. So come here and look in a proper looking
glass. It will give you some fun."
Laughingly with a few droll caresses he turned me about so that I faced the gigantic mirror on
the wall. There I saw myself.
I saw myself for a brief instant as my usual self, except that I looked unusually goodhumored, bright and laughing. But I had scarcely had time to recognize myself before the
reflection fell to pieces. A second, a third, a tenth, a twentieth figure sprang from it till the whole
gigantic mirror was full of nothing but Harrys or bits of him, each of which I saw only for the
instant of recognition. Some of these multitudinous Harrys were as old as I, some older, some
very old. Others were young. There were youths, boys, schoolboys, scamps, children. Fifty-yearolds and twenty-year-olds played leap frog. Thirty-year-olds and five-year-olds, solemn and
merry, worthy and comic, well-dressed and unpresentable, and even quite naked, long haired,
and hairless, all were I and all were seen for a flash, recognized and gone. They sprang from
each other in all directions, left and right and into the recesses of the mirror and clean out of it.
One, an elegant young fellow, leaped laughing into Pablo's arms and embraced him and they
went off together. And one who particularly pleased me, a good looking and charming boy of
sixteen or seventeen years, sprang like lightning into the corridor and began reading the notices
on the doors. I went after him and found him in front of a door on which was inscribed:
ALL GIRLS ARE YOURS
ONE QUARTER IN THE SLOT
The dear boy hurled himself forward, made a leap and, falling head first into the slot himself,
disappeared behind the door.
Pablo too had vanished. So apparently had the mirror and with it all the countless figures. I

realized that I was now left to myself and to the theater, and I went with curiosity from door to
door and read on each its alluring invitation.
The inscription
JOLLY HUNTING
GREAT HUNT IN AUTOMOBILES
attracted me. I opened the narrow door and stepped in.
I was swept at once into a world of noise and excitement. Cars, some of them armored, were
run through the streets chasing the pedestrians. They ran them down and either left them
mangled on the ground or crushed them to death against the walls of the houses. I saw at once
that it was the long-prepared, long-awaited and long-feared war between men and machines, now
at last broken out. On all sides lay dead and decomposing bodies, and on all sides, too, smashed
and distorted and half-burned cars. Airplanes circled above the frightful confusion and were
being fired upon from many roofs and windows with rifles and machine guns. On every wall
were wild and magnificently stirring placards, whose giant letters flamed like torches,
summoning the nation to side with the men against the machines, to make an end at last of the fat
and well-dressed and perfumed plutocrats who used machines to squeeze the fat from other
men's bodies, of them and their huge fiendishly purring automobiles. Set factories afire at last!
Make a little room on the crippled earth! Depopulate it so that the grass may grow again, and
woods, meadows, heather, stream and moor return to this world of dust and concrete. Other
placards, on the other hand, in wonderful colors and magnificently phrased, warned all those
who had a stake in the country and some share of prudence (in more moderate and less childish
terms which testified to the remarkable cleverness and intellect of those who bad composed
them) against the rising tide of anarchy. They depicted in a truly impressive way the blessings of
order and work and property and education and justice, and praised machinery as the last and
most sublime invention of the human mind. With its aid, men would be equal to the gods. I
studied these placards, both the red and the green, and reflected on them and marveled at them.
The flaming eloquence affected me as powerfully as the compelling logic. They were right, and I
stood as deeply convinced in front of one as in front of the other, a good deal disturbed all the
time by the rather juicy firing that went on all round me. Well, the principal thing was clear.
There was a war on, a violent, genuine and highly sympathetic war where there was no concern
for Kaiser or republic, for frontiers, flags or colors and other equally decorative and theatrical
matters, all nonsense at bottom; but a war in which every one who lacked air to breathe and no
longer found life exactly pleasing gave emphatic expression to his displeasure and strove to
prepare the way for a general destruction of this iron-cast civilization of ours. In every eye I saw
the unconcealed spark of destruction and murder, and in mine too these wild red roses bloomed
as rank and high, and sparkled as brightly. I joined the battle joyfully.
The best of all, however, was that my schoolfriend, Gustav, turned up close beside me. I had
lost sight of him for dozens of years, the wildest, strongest, most eager and venturesome of the
friends of my childhood. I laughed in my heart as I saw him blink at me with his bright blue
eyes. He beckoned and at once I followed him joyfully.
"Good Lord, Gustav," I cried happily, "I haven't seen you in ages. Whatever has become of
you?"
He gave a derisive snort, just as he used to do as a boy. "There you are again, you idiot,
jabbering and asking questions. I'm a professor of theology if you want to know. But, the Lord
be praised, there's no occasion for theology now, my boy. It's war. Come on!"
He shot the driver of a small car that came snorting towards us and leaping into it as nimbly
as a monkey, brought it to a standstill for me to get in. Then we drove like the devil between
bullets and crashed cars out of town and suburbs.
"Are you on the side of the manufacturers?" I asked my friend.

"Oh, Lord, that's a matter of taste, so we can leave it out of account—though now you
mention it, I rather think we might take the other side, since at bottom it's all the same, of course.
I'm a theologian and my predecessor, Luther, took the side of the princes and plutocrats against
the peasants. So now we'll establish the balance a little. This rotten car, I hope it'll hold out
another mile or two."
Swift as the wind, that child of heaven, we rattled on, and reached a green and peaceful
countryside many miles distant. We traversed a wide plain and then slowly climbed into the
mountains. Here we made a halt on a smooth and glistening road that led in bold curves between
the steep wall of rock and the low retaining wall. Far below shone the blue surface of a lake.
"Lovely view," said I.
"Very pretty. We'll call it the Axle Way. A good many axles of one sort or another are going
to crash here, Harry, my boy. So watch out!"
A tall pine grew by the roadside, and among the tall branches we saw something like a little
hut made of boards to serve as an outlook and point of vantage. Gustav smiled with a knowing
twinkle in his blue eyes. We hurried out of the car, climbed up the trunk and, breathing hard,
concealed ourselves in the outlook post, which pleased us much. We found rifles and revolvers
there and boxes of ammunition. We had scarcely cooled down when we heard the hoarse
imperious horn of a big luxury car from the next bend of the road. It came purring at top speed
up the smooth road. Our rifles were ready in our hands. The excitement was intense.
"Aim at the chauffeur," commanded Gustav quickly just as the heavy car went by beneath us.
I aimed, and fired at the chauffeur in his blue cap. The man fell in a heap. The car careened on,
charged the cliff face, rebounded, attacked the lower wall furiously with all its unwieldy weight
like a great bumble bee and, tumbling over, crashed with a brief and distant report into the depths
below.
"Got him!" Gustav laughed. "My turn next."
Another came as he spoke. There were three of four occupants packed in the back seat. From
the head of a woman a bright blue veil streamed out behind. It filled me with genuine remorse.
Who could say how pretty a face it might adorn? Good God, though we did play the brigand we
might at least emulate the illustrious and spare pretty women. Gustav, however, had already
fired. The driver shuddered and collapsed. The car leaped against the perpendicular cliff, fell
back and overturned, wheels uppermost. Its engine was still running and the wheels turned
absurdly in the air; but suddenly with a frightful explosion it burst into flames.
"A Ford," said Gustav. "We must get down and clear the road."
We climbed down and watched the burning heap. It soon burned out. Meanwhile we made
levers of green wood and hoisted it to the side of the road and over the wall into the abyss, where
for a long time it went crashing through the undergrowth. Two of the dead bodies had fallen out
as we turned the car over and lay on the road with their clothing partly burned. One wore a coat
which was still in fairly good condition. I searched the pockets to see who he was and came
across a leather portfolio with some cards in it. I took one and read: Tat Twam Asi.
"Very witty," said Gustav. "Though, as a matter of fact, it is all one what our victims are
called. They're poor devils just as we are. Their names don't matter. This world is done for and
so are we. The least painful solution would be to hold it under water for ten minutes. Now to
work—"
We threw the bodies after the car. Already another one was tooting. We shot it down with a
volley where we stood. It made a drunken swerve and reeled on for a stretch: then turned over
and lay gasping. One passenger was still sitting inside, but a pretty young girl got out uninjured,
though she was white and trembling violently. We greeted her politely and offered our
assistance. She was too much shaken to speak and stared at us for a while quite dazed.
"Well, first let us look after the old boy," said Gustav and turned to the occupant of the car
who still clung to his seat behind the chauffeur. He was a gentleman with short grey hair. His
intelligent, clear gray eyes were open, but he seemed to be seriously hurt; at least, blood flowed

from his mouth and he held his neck askew and rigid.
"Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Gustav. We have taken the liberty of shooting
your chauffeur. May we inquire whom we have the honor to address?"
The old man looked at us coolly and sadly out of his small gray eyes.
"I am Attorney-General Loering," he said slowly. "You have not only killed my poor
chauffeur, but me too, I fancy. Why did you shoot on us?"
"For exceeding the speed limit."
"We were not traveling at more than normal speed."
"What was normal yesterday is no longer normal today, Mr. Attorney-General. We are of the
opinion that whatever speed a motorcar travels is too great. We are destroying all cars and all
other machines also."
"Your rifles too?"
"Their turn will come, granted we have the time. Presumably by tomorrow or the day after we
shall all be done for. You know, of course, that this part of the world was shockingly
overpopulated. Well, now we are going to let in a little air."
"Are you shooting every one, without distinction?"
"Certainly. In many cases it may no doubt be a pity. I'm sorry, for example, about this
charming young lady. Your daughter, I presume."
"No. She is my stenographer."
"So much the better. And now will you please get out, or let us carry you out, as the car is to
be destroyed."
"I prefer to be destroyed with it."
"As you wish. But allow me to ask you one more question. You are a public prosecutor. I
never could understand how a man could be a public prosecutor. You make your living by
bringing other men, poor devils mostly, to trial and passing sentence on them. Isn't that so?"
"It is. I do my duty. It was my office. Exactly as it is the office of the hangman to hang those
whom I condemn to death. You too have assumed a like office. You kill people also."
"Quite true. Only we do not kill from duty, but pleasure, or much more, rather, from
displeasure and despair of the world. For this reason we find a certain amusement in killing
people. Has it never amused you?"
"You bore me. Be so kind as to do your work. Since the conception of duty is unknown to
you—"
He was silent and made a movement of his lips as though to spit. Only a little blood came,
however, and clung to his chin.
"One moment!" said Gustav politely. "The conception of duty is certainly unknown to me—
now. Formerly I had a great deal of official concern with it. I was a professor of theology.
Besides that, I was a soldier and went through the war. What seemed to me to be duty and what
the authorities and my superior officers from time to time enjoined upon me was not by any
means good. I would rather have done the opposite. But granting that the conception of duty is
no longer known to me, I still know the conception of guilt—perhaps they are the same thing. In
so far as a mother bore me, I am guilty. I am condemned to live. I am obliged to belong to a
state, to serve as a soldier, to kill and to pay taxes for armaments. And now at this moment the
guilt of life has brought me once more to the necessity of killing the people as it did in the war.
And this time I have no repugnance. I am resigned to the guilt. I have no objection to this stupid
congested world going to bits. I am glad to help and glad to perish with it."
The public prosecutor made an effort to smile a little with his lips on which the blood had
coagulated. He did not succeed very well, though the good intention was manifest.
"Good," said he. "So we are colleagues. Well, as such, please do your duty."
The pretty girl had meanwhile sat down by the side of the road and fainted.
At this moment there was again the tooting of a car coming down the road at full speed. We
drew the girl a little to one side and, standing close against the cliff, let the approaching car run

into the ruins of the other. The brakes were applied violently and the car reared up in the air. It
came to a standstill undamaged. We seized our rifles and quickly had the newcomers covered.
"Get out!" commanded Gustav. "Hands up!"
Three men got out of the car and obediently held up their hands.
"Is any one of you a doctor?" Gustav asked.
They shook their heads.
"Then be so good as to remove this gentleman. He is seriously hurt. Take him in your car to
the nearest town. Forward, and get on with it."
The old gentleman was soon lying in the other car. Gustav gave the word and off they went.
The stenographer meanwhile had come to herself and had been watching these proceedings. I
was glad we had made so fair a prize.
"Madam," said Gustav, "you have lost your employer. I hope you were not bound to the old
gentleman by other ties. You are now in my service. So be our good comrade. So much for that;
and now time presses. It will be uncomfortable here before long. Can you climb, Madam? Yes?
Then go ahead and we'll help you up between us."
We all climbed up to our hut in the tree as fast as we could. The lady did not feel very well up
there, but we gave her some brandy, and she was soon so much recovered that she was able to
admire the wonderful view over lake and mountains and to tell us also that her name was Dora.
Immediately after this, there was another car below us. It steered carefully past the overturned
one without stopping and then gathered speed.
"Poltroon!" laughed Gustav and shot the driver. The car zigzagged and dashing into the wall
stove it in and hung suspended over the abyss.
"Dora," I said, "can you use firearms?"
She could not, but we taught her how to load. She was clumsy at first and hurt her finger and
cried and wanted court-plaster. But Gustav told her it was war and that she must show her
courage. Then it went better.
"But what's going to become of us?" she asked.
"Don't know," said Gustav. "My friend Harry is fond of pretty girls. He'll look after you."
"But the police and the soldiers will come and kill us."
"There aren't any police and such like any more. We can choose, Dora. Either we stay quietly
up here and shoot down every car that tries to pass, or else we can take a car and drive off in it
and let others shoot at us. It's all the same which side we take. I'm for staying here."
And now there was the loud tooting of another car beneath us. It was soon accounted for and
lay there wheels uppermost.
Gustav smiled. "Yes, there are indeed too many men in the world. In earlier days it wasn't so
noticeable. But now that everyone wants air to breathe, and a car to drive as well, one does
notice it. Of course, what we are doing isn't rational. It's childishness, just as war is childishness
on a gigantic scale. In time, mankind will learn to keep its numbers in check by rational means.
Meanwhile, we are meeting an intolerable situation in a rather irrational way. However, the
principle's correct—we eliminate."
"Yes," said I, "what we are doing is probably mad, and probably it is good and necessary all
the same. It is not a good thing when man overstrains his reason and tries to reduce to rational
order matters that are not susceptible of rational treatment. Then there arise ideals such as those
of the Americans or of the Bolsheviks. Both are extraordinarily rational, and both lead to a
frightful oppression and impoverishment of life, because they simplify it so crudely. The likeness
of man, once a high ideal, is in process of becoming a machine-made article. It is for madmen
like us, perhaps, to ennoble it again."
With a laugh Gustav replied: "You talk like a book, my boy. It is a pleasure and a privilege to
drink at such a fount of wisdom. And perhaps there is even something in what you say. But now
kindly reload your piece. You are a little too dreamy for my taste. A couple of bucks can come
dashing by here again any moment, and we can't kill them with philosophy. We must have ball

in our barrels."
A car came and was dropped at once. The road was blocked. A survivor, a stout red-faced
man, gesticulated wildly over the ruins. Then he stared up and down and, discovering our hiding
place, came for us bellowing and shooting up at us with a revolver.
"Get off with you or I'll shoot," Gustav shouted down. The man took aim at him and fired
again. Then we shot him.
After this two more came and were bagged. Then the road was silent and deserted.
Apparently the news had got about that it was dangerous. We had time to enjoy the beauty of the
view. On the far side of the lake a small town lay in the valley. Smoke rose from it and soon we
saw fire leaping from roof to roof. Shooting could be heard. Dora cried a little and I stroked her
wet cheeks.
"Have we all got to die then?" she asked. There was no reply. Meanwhile a man on foot went
past below. He saw the smashed-up cars and began nosing round them. Leaning over into one of
them he pulled out a gay parasol, a lady's handbag and a bottle of wine. Then he sat down
contentedly on the wall, took a drink from the bottle and ate something wrapped in tinfoil out of
the handbag. After emptying the bottle he went on, well pleased, with the parasol clasped under
his arm; and I said to Gustav: "Could you find it in you to shoot at this good fellow and make a
hole in his head? God knows, I couldn't."
"You're not asked to," my friend growled. But he did not feel very comfortable either. We had
no sooner caught sight of a man whose behavior was harmless and peaceable and childlike and
who was still in a state of innocence than all our praise-worthy and most necessary activities
became stupid and repulsive. Pah—all that blood! We were ashamed of ourselves. But in the war
there must have been generals even who felt the same.
"Don't let us stay here any longer," Dora implored. "Let's go down. We are sure to find
something to eat in the cars. Aren't you hungry, you Bolsheviks?"
Down in the burning town the bells began to peal with a wild terror. We set ourselves to
climb down. As I helped Dora to climb over the breast work, I kissed her knee. She laughed
aloud, and then the planks gave way and we both fell into vacancy—
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Once more I stood in the round corridor, still excited by the hunting adventure. And
everywhere on all the countless doors were the alluring inscriptions:
MUTABOR
TRANSFORMATION INTO ANY ANIMAL OR PLANT
YOU PLEASE
KAMASUTRAM
INSTRUCTION IN THE INDIAN ARTS OF LOVE
COURSE FOR BEGINNERS; FORTY-TWO DIFFERENT
METHODS AND PRACTICES
DELIGHTFUL SUICIDE
YOU LAUGH YOURSELF TO BITS
DO YOU WANT TO BE ALL SPIRIT?
THE WISDOM OF THE EAST.
DOWNFALL OF THE WEST
MODERATE PRICES. NEVER SURPASSED

COMPENDIUM OF ART
TRANSFORMATION FROM TIME INTO SPACE
BY MEANS OF MUSIC
LAUGHING TEARS
CABINET OF HUMOR
SOLITUDE MADE EASY
COMPLETE SUBSTITUTE FOR ALL FORMS OF
SOCIABILITY.
The series of inscriptions was endless. One was
GUIDANCE IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE
PERSONALITY. SUCCESS GUARANTEED
This seemed to me to be worth looking into and I went in at this door.
I found myself in a quiet twilit room where a man with something like a large chessboard in
front of him sat in Eastern fashion on the floor. At the first glance I thought it was friend Pablo.
He wore at any rate a similar gorgeous silk jacket and had the same dark and shining eyes.
"Are you Pablo?" I asked.
"I am not anybody," he replied amiably. "We have no names here and we are not anybody. I
am a chess player. Do you wish for instruction in the building up of the personality?"
"Yes, please."
"Then be so kind as to place a few dozen of your pieces at my disposal."
"My pieces—?"
"Of the pieces into which you saw your so-called personality broken up. I can't play without
pieces."
He held a glass up to me and again I saw the unity of my personality broken up into many
selves whose number seemed even to have increased. The pieces were now, however, very
small, about the size of chessmen. The player took a dozen or so of them in his sure and quiet
fingers and placed them on the ground near the board. As he did so he began to speak in the
monotonous way of one who goes through a recitation or reading that he has often gone through
before.
"The mistaken and unhappy notion that a man is an enduring unity is known to you. It is also
known to you that man consists of a multitude of souls, of numerous selves. The separation of
the unity of the personality into these numerous pieces passes for madness. Science has invented
the name schizomania for it. Science is in this so far right as no multiplicity may be dealt with
unless there be a series, a certain order and grouping. It is wrong insofar as it holds that one only
and binding and lifelong order is possible for the multiplicity of subordinate selves. This error of
science has many unpleasant consequences, and the single advantage of simplifying the work of
the state-appointed pastors and masters and saving them the labors of original thought. In
consequence of this error many persons pass for normal, and indeed for highly valuable members
of society, who are incurably mad; and many, on the other hand, are looked upon as mad who are
geniuses. Hence it is that we supplement the imperfect psychology of science by the conception
that we call the art of building up the soul. We demonstrate to anyone whose soul has fallen to
pieces that he can rearrange these pieces of a previous self in what order he pleases, and so attain
to an endless multiplicity of moves in the game of life. As the playwright shapes a drama from a
handful of characters, so do we from the pieces of the disintegrated self build up ever new
groups, with ever new interplay and suspense, and new situations that are eternally inexhaustible.

Look!"
With the sure and silent touch of his clever fingers he took hold of my pieces, all the old men
and young men and children and women, cheerful and sad, strong and weak, nimble and clumsy,
and swiftly arranged them on his board for a game. At once they formed themselves into groups
and families, games and battles, friendships and enmities, making a small world. For a while he
let this lively and yet orderly world go through its evolutions before my enraptured eyes in play
and strife, making treaties and fighting battles, wooing, marrying and multiplying. It was indeed
a crowded stage, a moving breathless drama.
Then he passed his hand swiftly over the board and gently swept all the pieces into a heap;
and, meditatively with an artist's skill, made up a new game of the same pieces with quite other
groupings, relationships and entanglements. The second game had an affinity with the first, it
was the same world built of the same material, but the key was different, the time changed, the
motif was differently given out and the situations differently presented.
And in this fashion the clever architect built up one game after another out of the figures, each
of which was a bit of myself, and every game had a distant resemblance to every other. Each
belonged recognizably to the same world and acknowledged a common origin. Yet each was
entirely new.
"This is the art of life," he said dreamily. "You may yourself as an artist develop the game of
your life and lend it animation. You may complicate and enrich it as you please. It lies in your
hands. Just as madness, in a higher sense, is the beginning of all wisdom, so is schizomania the
beginning of all art and all fantasy. Even learned men have come to a partial recognition of this,
as may be gathered, for example, from Prince Wunderhorn, that enchanting book, in which the
industry and pains of a man of learning, with the assistance of the genius of a number of madmen
and artists shut up as such, are immortalized. Here, take your little pieces away with you. The
game will often give you pleasure. The piece that today grew to the proportions of an intolerable
bugbear, you will degrade tomorrow to a mere lay figure. The luckless Cinderella will in the next
game be the princess. I wish you much pleasure, my dear sir."
I bowed low in gratitude to the gifted chess player, put the little pieces in my pocket and
withdrew through the narrow door.
My real intention was to seat myself at once on the floor in the corridor and play the game for
hours, for whole eternities; but I was no sooner in the bright light of the circular theater passage
than a new and irresistible current carried me along. A dazzling poster flashed before my eyes:
MARVELOUS TAMING OF THE STEPPENWOLF
Many different emotions surged up in me at the sight of this announcement. My heart was
painfully contracted by all kinds of fears and repressions from my former life and the reality I
had left behind. With trembling hand I opened the door and found myself in the booth of a fair
with an iron rail separating me from a wretched stage. On the stage I saw an animal tamer—a
cheap-jack gentleman with a pompous air—who in spite of a large moustache, exuberantly
muscular biceps and his absurd circus getup had a malicious and decidedly unpleasant
resemblance to myself. The strong man led on a leash like a dog—lamentable sight—a large,
beautiful but terribly emaciated wolf, whose eyes were cowed and furtive; and it was as
disgusting as it was intriguing, as horrible as it was all the same secretly entertaining, to see this
brutal tamer of animals put the noble and yet so ignominiously obedient beast of prey through a
series of tricks and sensational turns.
At any rate, the man, my diabolically distorted double, had his wolf marvelously broken. The
wolf was obediently attentive to every command and responded like a dog to every call and
every crack of the whip. He went down on his knees, lay for dead, and, aping the lord of
creation, carried a loaf, an egg, a piece of meat, a basket in his mouth with cheerful obedience;
and he even had to pick up the whip that the tamer had let fall and carry it after him in his teeth

while he wagged his tail with an unbearable submissiveness. A rabbit was put in front of him and
then a white lamb. He bared his teeth, it is true, and the saliva dropped from his mouth while he
trembled with desire, but he did not touch either of the animals; and at the word of command he
jumped over them with a graceful leap, as they cowered trembling on the floor. More—he laid
himself down between the rabbit and the lamb and embraced them with his foremost paws to
form a touching family group, at the same time eating a stick of chocolate from the man's hand.
It was an agony to witness the fantastic extent to which the wolf had learned to belie his nature;
and I stood there with my hair on end.
There was some compensation, however, both for the horrified spectator and for the wolf
himself, in the second part of the program. For after this refined exhibition of animal taming and
when the man with a winning smile had made his triumphant bow over the group of the wolf and
the lamb, the roles were reversed. My engaging double suddenly with a low reverence laid his
whip at the wolf's feet and became as agitated, as shrunken and wretched, as the wolf had been
before. The wolf, however, licked his chops with a grin, his constraint and dissimulation erased.
His eyes kindled. His whole body was taut and showed the joy he felt at recovering his wild
nature.
And now the wolf commanded and the man obeyed. At the word of command the man sank
on his knees, let his tongue loll out and tore his clothes off with his filed teeth. He went on two
feet or all-fours just as the wolf ordered him, played the human being, lay for dead, let the wolf
ride on his back and carried the whip after him. With the aptness of a dog he submitted gladly to
every humiliation and perversion of his nature. A lovely girl came on to the stage and went up to
the tamed man. She stroked his chin and rubbed her cheek against his; but he remained on allfours, remained a beast. He shook his head and began to show his teeth at the charming
creature—so menacingly and wolfishly at last, that she ran away. Chocolate was put before him,
but with a contemptuous sniff he thrust it from him with his snout. Finally the white lamb and
the fat mottled rabbit were brought on again and the docile man gave his last turn and played the
wolf most amusingly. He seized the shrieking creatures in his fingers and teeth, tore them limb
from limb, grinningly chewed the living flesh and rapturously drank their warm blood while his
eyes closed in a dreamy delight.
I made for the door in horror and dashed out. This Magic Theater was clearly no paradise. All
hell lay beneath its charming surface. O God, was there even here no release?
In fear I hurried this way and that. I had the taste of blood and chocolate in my mouth, the one
as hateful as the other. I desired nothing but to be beyond this wave of disgust. I wrestled with
myself for more bearable, friendlier pictures. "O Friend, not these notes!" sang in my head, and
with horror I remembered those terrible photographs from the Front that one saw occasionally
during the war—those heaps of bodies entangled with each other, whose faces were changed to
grinning ghouls by their gas masks. How silly and childish of me, a humanely minded opponent
of war though I was, to have been horrified by those pictures. Today I knew that no tamer of
beasts, no general, no insane person could hatch a thought or a picture in his brain that I could
not match myself with one every bit as frightful, every bit as savage and wicked, as crude and
stupid.
With an immense relief I remembered the notice I had seen on first entering the theater, the
one that the nice boy had stormed so furiously—
ALL GIRLS ARE YOURS
and it seemed to me, all in all, that there was really nothing else so desirable as this. I was greatly
cheered at finding that I could escape from that cursed wolf world, and went in.
The fragrance of spring-time met me. The very atmosphere of boyhood and youth, so deeply
familiar and yet so legendary, was around me and in my veins flowed the blood of those days.
All that I had done and thought and been since, fell away from me and I was young again. An

hour, a few minutes before, I had prided myself on knowing what love was and desire and
longing, but it had been the love and the longing of an old man. Now I was young again and this
glowing current of fire that I felt in me, this mighty impulse, this unloosening passion like that
wind in March that brings the thaw, was young and new and genuine. How the flame that I had
forgotten leaped up again, how darkly stole on my ears the tones of long ago! My blood was on
fire, and blossomed forth as my soul cried aloud and sang. I was a boy of fifteen or sixteen with
my head full of Latin and Greek and poetry. I was all ardor and ambition and my fancy was
laden with the artist's dreams. But far deeper and stronger and more awful than all there burned
and leaped in me the flame of love, the hunger of sex, the fever and the foreboding of desire.
I was standing on a spur of the hills above the little town where I lived. The wind wafted the
smell of spring and violets through my long hair. Below in the town I saw the gleam of the river
and the windows of my home, and all that I saw and heard and smelled overwhelmed me, as
fresh and reeling from creation, as radiant in depth of color, swayed by the wind of spring in as
magical a transfiguration, as when once I looked on the world with the eyes of youth—first
youth and poetry. With wandering hand I pulled a half-opened leaf bud from a bush that was
newly green. I looked at it and smelled it (with the smell everything of those days came back in a
glow) and then I put it between my lips, lips that no girl had ever kissed, and began playfully to
bite it. At the sour and aromatically bitter taste I knew at once and exactly what it was that I was
living over again. It all came back. I was living again an hour of the last years of my boyhood, a
Sunday afternoon in early spring, the day that on a lonely walk I met Rosa Kreisler and greeted
her so shyly and fell in love with her so madly.
She came, that day, alone and dreamingly up the hill towards me. She had not seen me and
the sight of her approaching filled me with apprehension and suspense. I saw her hair, tied in two
thick plaits, with loose strands on either side, her cheeks blown by the wind. I saw for the first
time in my life how beautiful she was, and how beautiful and dreamlike the play of the wind in
her delicate hair, how beautiful and provocative the fall of her thin blue dress over her young
limbs; and just as the bitter spice of the chewed bud coursed through me with the whole dread
pleasure and pain of spring, so the sight of the girl filled me with the whole deadly foreboding of
love, the foreboding of woman. In that moment was contained the shock and the forewarning of
enormous possibilities and promises, nameless delight, unthinkable bewilderments, anguish,
suffering, release to the innermost and deepest guilt. Oh, how sharp was the bitter taste of spring
on my tongue! And how the wind streamed playfully through the loose hair beside her rosy
cheeks! She was close now. She looked up and recognized me. For a moment she blushed a little
and looked aside; but when I took off my school cap, she was self-possessed at once and, raising
her head, returned my greeting with a smile that was quite grown-up. Then, entirely mistress of
the situation, she went slowly on, in a halo of the thousand wishes, hopes and adorations that I
sent after her.
So it had once been on a Sunday thirty-five years before, and all that had been then came back
to me in this moment. Hill and town, March wind and buddy taste, Rosa and her brown hair, the
welling-up of desire and the sweet suffocation of anguish. All was as it was then, and it seemed
to me that I had never in my life loved as I loved Rosa that day. But this time it was given me to
greet her otherwise than on that occasion. I saw her blush when she recognized me, and the pains
she took to conceal it, and I knew at once that she had a liking for me and that this encounter
meant the same for her as for me. And this time instead of standing ceremoniously cap in hand
till she had gone by, I did, in spite of anguish bordering on obsession, what my blood bade me
do. I cried: "Rosa! Thank God, you've come, you beautiful, beautiful girl. I love you so dearly."
It was not perhaps the most brilliant of all the things that might have been said at this moment,
but there was no need for brilliance, and it was enough and more. Rosa did not put on her grownup air, and she did not go on. She stopped and looked at me and, growing even redder than
before, she said: "Heaven be praised, Harry—do you really like me?" Her brown eyes lit up her
strong face, and they showed me that my past life and loves had all been false and perplexed and

full of stupid unhappiness from that very moment on a Sunday afternoon when I had let Rosa
pass me by. Now, however, the blunder was put right. Everything went differently and
everything was good.
We clasped hands, and hand in hand walked slowly on as happy as we were embarrassed. We
did not know what to do or to say, so we began to walk faster from embarrassment and then
broke into a run, and ran till we lost our breath and had to stand still. But we did not let go our
hands. We were both still children and did not know quite what to do with each other. That
Sunday we did not even kiss, but we were immeasurably happy. We stood to get our breath. We
sat on the grass and I stroked her hand while she passed the other one shyly over my hair. And
then we got up again and tried to measure which of us was the taller. In reality, I was the taller
by a finger's breath, but I would not have it so. I maintained that we were of exactly the same
height and that God had designed us for each other and that later on we would marry. Then Rosa
said that she smelled violets and we knelt in the short spring grass and looked for them and
found a few with short stalks and I gave her mine and she gave me hers, and as it was getting
chill and the sun slanted low over the cliffs, Rosa said she must go home. At this we both
became very sad, for I dared not accompany her. But now we shared a secret and it was our
dearest possession. I stayed behind on the cliffs and lying down with my face over the edge of
the sheer descent, I looked down over the town and watched for her sweet little figure to appear
far below and saw it pass the spring and over the bridge. And now I knew that she had reached
her home and was going from room to room, and I lay up there far away from her; but there was
a bond between her and me. The same current ran in both of us and a secret passed to and fro.
We saw each other again here and there all through this spring, sometimes on the cliffs,
sometimes over the garden hedge; and when the elder began to bloom we gave each other the
first shy kiss. It was little that children like us had to give each other and our kiss lacked warmth
and fullness. I scarcely ventured to touch the strands of her hair about her ears. But all the love
and all the joy that was in us were ours. It was a shy emotion and the troth we plighted was still
unripe, but this timid waiting on each other taught us a new happiness. We climbed one little step
up on the ladder of love. And thus, beginning from Rosa and the violets, I lived again through all
the loves of my life—but under happier stars. Rosa I lost, and Irmgard appeared; and the sun was
warmer and the stars less steady, but Irmgard no more than Rosa was mine. Step by step I had to
climb. There was much to live through and much to learn; and I had to lose Irmgard and Anna
too. Every girl that I had once loved in youth, I loved again, but now I was able to inspire each
with love. There was something I could give to each, something each could give to me. Wishes,
dreams and possibilities that had once had no other life than my own imagination were lived now
in reality. They passed before me like beautiful flowers, Ida and Laura and all whom I had loved
for a summer, a month, or a day.
I was now, as I perceived, that good-looking and ardent boy whom I had seen making so
eagerly for love's door. I was living a bit of myself only—a bit that in my actual life and being
had not been expressed to a tenth or a thousandth part, and I was living it to the full. I was
watching it grow unmolested by any other part of me. It was not perturbed by the thinker, nor
tortured by the Steppenwolf, nor dwarfed by the poet, the visionary or the moralist. No—I was
nothing now but the lover and I breathed no other happiness and no other suffering than love.
Irmgard had already taught me to dance and Ida to kiss, and it was Emma first, the most
beautiful of them all, who on an autumn evening beneath a swaying elm gave me her brown
breasts to kiss and the cup of passion to drink.
I lived through much in Pablo's little theater and not a thousandth part can be told in words.
All the girls I had ever loved were mine. Each gave me what she alone had to give and to each I
gave what she alone knew how to take. Much love, much happiness, much indulgence, and much
bewilderment, too, and suffering fell to my share. All the love that I had missed in my life
bloomed magically in my garden during this hour of dreams. There were chaste and tender
blooms, garish ones that blazed, dark ones swiftly fading. There were flaring lust, inward reverie,

glowing melancholy, anguished dying, radiant birth. I found women who were only to be taken
by storm and those whom it was a joy to woo and win by degrees. Every twilit corner of my life
where, if but for a moment, the voice of sex had called me, a woman's glance kindled me or the
gleam of a girl's white skin allured me, emerged again and all that had been missed was made
good. All were mine, each in her own way. The woman with the remarkable dark brown eyes
beneath flaxen hair was there. I had stood beside her for a quarter of an hour in the corridor of an
express and afterwards she often appeared in my dreams. She did not speak a word, but what she
taught me of the art of love was unimaginable, frightful, deathly. And the sleek, still Chinese,
from the harbor of Marseilles, with her glassy smile, her smooth dead-black hair and swimming
eyes—she too knew undreamed-of things. Each had her secret and the bouquet of her soil. Each
kissed and laughed in a fashion of her own, and in her own peculiar way was shameful and in her
own peculiar way shameless. They came and went. The stream carried them towards me and
washed me up to them and away. I was a child in the stream of sex, at play in the midst of all its
charm, its danger and surprise. And it astonished me to find how rich my life—the seemingly so
poor and loveless life of the Steppenwolf—had been in the opportunities and allurements of love.
I had missed them. I had fled before them. I had stumbled on over them. I had made haste to
forget them. But here they all were stored up in their hundreds, and not one missing. And now
that I saw them I gave myself up to them without defence and sank down into the rosy twilight of
their underworld. Even that seduction to which Pablo had once invited me came again, and other,
earlier ones which I had not fully grasped at the time, fantastic games for three or four, caught
me up in their dance with a smile. Many things happened and many games, best unmentioned,
were played.
When I rose once more to the surface of the unending stream of allurement and vice and
entanglement, I was calm and silent. I was equipped, far gone in knowledge, wise, expert—ripe
for Hermine. She rose as the last figure in my populous mythology, the last name of an endless
series; and at once I came to myself and made an end of this fairy tale of love; for I did not wish
to meet her in this twilight of a magic mirror. I belonged to her not just as this one piece in my
game of chess—I belonged to her wholly. Oh, I would now so lay out the pieces in my game that
all was centered in her and led to fulfillment.
The stream had washed me ashore. Once again I stood in the silent theater passage. What
now? I felt for the little figures in my pocket—but already this impulse died away. Around me
was the inexhaustible world of doors, notices and magic mirrors. Listlessly I read the first words
that caught my eye, and shuddered.
HOW ONE KILLS FOR LOVE
was what it said.
Swiftly a picture was flashed upon my memory with a jerk and remained there one instant.
Hermine at the table of a restaurant, turning all at once from the wine and food, lost in an abyss
of speech, with a terrifying earnestness in her face as she said that she would have one aim only
in making me her lover, and it was that she should die by my hand. A heavy wave of anguish and
darkness flooded my heart. Suddenly everything confronted me once more. Suddenly once more
the sense of the last call of fate gripped my heart. Desperately I felt in my pocket for the little
figures so that I might practise a little magic and rearrange the layout of the board. The figures
were no longer there. Instead of them I pulled out a knife. In mortal dread I ran along the
corridor, past every door. I stood opposite the gigantic mirror. I looked into it. In the mirror there
stood a beautiful wolf as tall as myself. He stood still, glancing shyly from unquiet eyes. As he
leered at me, his eyes blazed and he grinned a little so that his chops parted and showed his red
tongue.
Where was Pablo? Where was Hermine? Where was that clever fellow who had discoursed so
pleasantly about the building up of the personality?

Again I looked into the mirror. I had been mad. I must have been mad. There was no wolf in
the mirror, lolling his tongue in his maw. It was I, Harry. My face was gray, forsaken of all
fancies, wearied by all vice, horribly pale. Still it was a human being, someone one could speak
to.
"Harry," I said, "what are you doing there?"
"Nothing," said he in the mirror, "I am only waiting. I am waiting for death."
"Where is death then?"
"Coming," said the other. And I heard from the empty spaces within the theater the sound of
music, a beautiful and awful music, that music from Don Giovanni that heralds the approach of
the guest of stone. With an awful and an iron clang it rang through the ghostly house, coming
from the other world, from the immortals.
"Mozart," I thought, and with the word conjured up the most beloved and the most exalted
picture that my inner life contained.
At that, there rang out behind me a peal of laughter, a dear and ice-cold laughter out of a
world unknown to men, a world beyond all suffering, and born of divine humor. I turned about,
frozen through with the blessing of this laughter, and there came Mozart. He passed by me
laughing as he went and, strolling quietly on, he opened the door of one of the boxes and went
in. Eagerly I followed the god of my youth, the object, all my life long, of love and veneration.
The music rang on. Mozart was leaning over the front of the box. Of the theater nothing was to
be seen. Darkness filled the boundless space.
"You see," said Mozart, "it goes all right without the saxophone—though to be sure, I
shouldn't wish to tread on the toes of that famous instrument."
"Where are we?" I asked.
"We are in the last act of Don Giovanni. Leporello is on his knees. A superb scene, and the
music is fine too. There is a lot in it, certainly, that's very human, but you can hear the other
world in it—the laughter, eh?"
"It is the last great music ever written," said I with the pomposity of a schoolmaster.
"Certainly, there was Schubert to come. Hugo Wolf also, and I must not forget the poor, lovely
Chopin either. You frown, Maestro? Oh, yes, Beethoven—he is wonderful too. But all that—
beautiful as it may be—has something rhapsodical about it, something of disintegration. A work
of such plentitude and power as Don Giovanni has never since arisen among men."
"Don't overstrain yourself," laughed Mozart, in frightful mockery. "You're a musician
yourself, I perceive. Well, I have given up the trade and retired to take my ease. It is only for
amusement that I look on at the business now and then."
He raised his hands as though he were conducting, and a moon, or some pale constellation,
rose somewhere. I looked over the edge of the box into immeasurable depths of space. Mist and
clouds floated there. Mountains and seashores glimmered, and beneath us extended world-wide a
desert plain. On this plain we saw an old gentleman of a worthy aspect, with a long beard, who
drearily led a large following of some ten thousand men in black. He had a melancholy and
hopeless air; and Mozart said:
"Look, there's Brahms. He is striving for redemption, but it will take him all his time."
I realized that the thousands of men in black were the players of all those notes and parts in
his scores which according to divine judgment were superfluous.
"Too thickly orchestrated, too much material wasted," Mozart said with a nod.
And thereupon we saw Richard Wagner marching at the head of a host just as vast, and felt
the pressure of those thousands as they clung and closed upon him. Him, too, we watched as he
dragged himself along with slow and sad step.
"In my young days," I remarked sadly, "these two musicians passed as the most extreme
contrasts conceivable."
Mozart laughed.
"Yes, that is always the way. Such contrasts, seen from a little distance, always tend to show

their increasing similarity. Thick orchestration was in any case neither Wagner's nor Brahms'
personal failing. It was a fault of their time."
"What? And have they got to pay for it so dearly?" I cried in protest.
"Naturally. The law must take its course. Until they have paid the debt of their time it cannot
be known whether anything personal to themselves is left over to stand to their credit."
"But they can't either of them help it!"
"Of course not. They cannot help it either that Adam ate the apple. But they have to pay for it
all the same."
"But that is frightful."
"Certainly. Life is always frightful. We cannot help it and we are responsible all the same.
One's born and at once one is guilty. You must have had a remarkable sort of religious education
if you did not know that."
I was now thoroughly miserable. I saw myself as a dead-weary pilgrim, dragging myself
across the desert of the other world, laden with the many superfluous books I had written, and all
the articles and essays; followed by the army of compositors who had had the type to set up, by
the army of readers who had had it all to swallow. My God—and over and above it all there was
Adam and the apple, and the whole of original sin. All this, then, was to be paid for in endless
purgatory. And only then could the question arise whether, behind all that, there was anything
personal, anything of my own, left over; or whether all that I had done and all its consequences
were merely the empty foam of the sea and a meaningless ripple in the flow of what was over
and done.
Mozart laughed aloud when he saw my long face. He laughed so hard that he turned a
somersault in the air and played trills with his heels. At the same time he shouted at me: "Hey,
my young fellow, does your tongue smart, man, do your lungs really pinch, man? You think of
your readers, those carrion feeders, and all your typesetters, those wretched abettors, and saberwhetters. You dragon, you make me laugh till I shake me and burst the stitches of my breeches.
O heart of a gull, with printer's ink dull, and soul sorrow-full. A candle I'll leave you, if that'll
relieve you. Belittled, betattled, spectacled and shackled, and pitifully snagged and by the tail
wagged, with shilly and shally no more shall you dally. For the devil, I pray, who will bear you
away and slice you and splice you till that shall suffice you for your writings and rotten
plagiarisings ill-gotten."
This, however, was too much for me. Anger left me no time for melancholy. I caught hold of
Mozart by the pigtail and off he flew. The pigtail grew longer and longer like the tail of a comet
and I was whirled along at the end of it. The devil—but it was cold in this world we traversed!
These immortals put up with a rarefied and glacial atmosphere. But it was delightful all the
same—this icy air. I could tell that, even in the brief moment that elapsed before I lost my
senses. A bitter-sharp and steel-bright icy gaiety coursed through me and a desire to laugh as
shrilly and wildly and unearthly as Mozart had done. But then breath and consciousness failed
me.
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

When I came to myself I was bewildered and exhausted. The white light of the corridor shone
in the polished floor. I was not among the immortals, not yet. I was still, as ever, on this side of
the riddle of suffering, of wolf-men and torturing complexities. I had found no happy spot, no
endurable resting place. There must be an end of it.
In the great mirror, Harry stood opposite me. He did not appear to be very flourishing. His
appearance was much the same as on that night when he visited the professor and sat through the
dance at the Black Eagle. But that was far behind, years, centuries behind. He had grown older.
He had learned to dance. He had visited the magic theater. He had heard Mozart laugh. Dancing
and women and knives had no more terrors for him. Even those who have average gifts, given a

few hundred years, come to maturity. I looked for a long time at Harry in the looking glass. I still
knew him well enough, and he still bore a faint resemblance to the boy of fifteen who one
Sunday in March had met Rosa on the cliffs and taken off his school cap to her. And yet he had
grown a few centuries older since then. He had pursued philosophy and music and had his fill of
war and his Elsasser at the Steel Helmet and discussed Krishna with men of honest learning. He
had loved Erica and Maria, and had been Hermine's friend, and shot down motorcars, and slept
with the sleek Chinese, and encountered Mozart and Goethe, and made sundry holes in the web
of time and rents in reality's disguise, though it held him a prisoner still. And suppose he had lost
his pretty chessman again, still he had a fine blade in his pocket. On then, old Harry, old weary
loon.
Bah, the devil—how bitter the taste of life! I spat at Harry in the looking glass. I gave him a
kick and kicked him to splinters. I walked slowly along the echoing corridor, carefully scanning
the doors that had held out so many glowing promises. Not one now showed a single
announcement. Slowly I passed by all the hundred doors of the Magic Theater. Was not this the
day I had been to a masked ball? Hundreds of years had passed since then. Soon years would
cease altogether. Something, though, was still to be done. Hermine awaited me. A strange
marriage it was to be, and a sorrowful wave it was that bore me on, drearily bore me on, a slave,
a wolf-man. Bah, the devil!
I stopped at the last door. So far had the sorrowful wave borne me. O Rosa! O departed youth!
O Goethe! O Mozart!
I opened it. What I saw was a simple and beautiful picture. On a rug on the floor lay two
naked figures, the beautiful Hermine and the beautiful Pablo, side by side in a sleep of deep
exhaustion after love's play. Beautiful, beautiful figures, lovely pictures, wonderful bodies.
Beneath Hermine's left breast was a fresh round mark, darkly bruised—a love bite of Pablo's
beautiful, gleaming teeth. There, where the mark was, I plunged in my knife to the hilt. The
blood welled out over her white and delicate skin. I would have kissed away the blood if
everything had happened a little differently. As it was, I did not. I only watched how the blood
flowed and watched her eyes open for a little moment in pain and deep wonder. What makes her
wonder? I thought. Then it occurred to me. that I had to shut her eyes. But they shut again of
themselves. So all was done. She only turned a little to one side, and from her armpit to her
breast I saw the play of a delicate shadow. It seemed that it wished to recall something, but what
I could not remember. Then she lay still.
For long I looked at her and at last I waked with a shudder and turned to go. Then I saw Pablo
stretch himself. I saw him open his eyes and stretch his limbs and then bend over the dead girl
and smile. Never, I thought, will this fellow take anything seriously. Everything makes him
smile. Pablo, meanwhile, carefully turned over a corner of the rug and covered Hermine up as far
as her breast so that the wound was hidden, and then he went silently out of the box. Where was
he going? Was everybody leaving me alone? I stayed there, alone with the half-shrouded body of
her whom I loved—and envied. The boyish hair hung low over the white forehead. Her lips
shone red against the dead pallor of her blanched face and they were a little parted. Her hair
diffused its delicate perfume and through it glimmered the little shell-like ear.
Her wish was fulfilled. Before she had ever been mine, I had killed my love. I had done the
unthinkable, and now I kneeled and stared and did not know at all what this deed meant, whether
it was good and right or the opposite. What would the clever chess player, what would Pablo
have to say to it? I knew nothing and I could not think. The painted mouth glowed more red on
the growing pallor of the face. So had my whole life been. My little happiness and love were like
this staring mouth, a little red upon a mask of death.
And from the dead face, from the dead white shoulders and the dead white arms, there
exhaled and slowly crept a shudder, a desert wintriness and desolation, a slowly, slowly
increasing chill in which my hands and lips grew numb. Had I quenched the sun? Had I stopped
the heart of all life? Was it the coldness of death and space breaking in?

With a shudder I stared at the stony brow and the stark hair and the cool pale shimmer of the
ear. The cold that streamed from them was deathly and yet it was beautiful, it rang, it vibrated. It
was music!
Hadn't I once felt this shudder before and found it at the same time a joy? Hadn't I once
caught this music before? Yes, with Mozart and the immortals.
Verses came into my head that I had once come upon somewhere:
We above you ever more residing
In the ether's star translumined ice
Know nor day nor night nor time's dividing,
Wear nor age nor sex as our device.
Cool and unchanging is our eternal being,
Cool and star bright is our eternal laughter.
Then the door of the box opened and in came Mozart. I did not recognize him at the first
glance, for he was without pigtail, knee breeches and buckled shoes, in modern dress. He took a
seat close beside me, and I was on the point of holding him back because of the blood that had
flowed over the floor from Hermine's breast. He sat there and began busying himself with an
apparatus and some instruments that stood beside him. He took it very seriously, tightening this
and screwing that, and I looked with wonder at his adroit and nimble fingers and wished that I
might see them playing a piano for once. I watched him thoughtfully, or in a reverie rather, lost
in admiration of his beautiful and skillful hands, warmed too, by the sense of his presence and a
little apprehensive as well. Of what he was actually doing and of what it was that he screwed and
manipulated, I took no heed whatever.
I soon found, however, that he had fixed up a radio and put it in going order, and now he
inserted the loudspeaker and said: "Munich is on the air. Concerto Grosso in F Major by
Handel."
And in fact, to my indescribable astonishment and horror, the devilish tin trumpet spat out,
without more ado, a mixture of bronchial slime and chewed rubber; that noise that owners of
gramophones and radios have agreed to call music. And behind the slime and the croaking there
was, sure enough, like an old master beneath a layer of dirt, the noble outline of that divine
music. I could distinguish the majestic structure and the deep wide breath and the full broad
bowing of the strings.
"My God," I cried in horror, "what are you doing, Mozart? Do you really mean to inflict this
mess on me and yourself, this triumph of our day, the last victorious weapon in the war of
extermination against art? Must this be, Mozart?"
How the weird man laughed! And what a cold and eerie laugh! It was noiseless and yet
everything was shattered by it. He marked my torment with deep satisfaction while he bent over
the cursed screws and attended to the tin trumpet. Laughing still, he let the distorted, the
murdered and murderous music ooze out and on; and laughing still, he replied:
"Please, no pathos, my friend! Anyway, did you observe the ritardando? An inspiration, eh?
Yes, and now you tolerant man, let the sense of this ritardando touch you. Do you hear the
basses? They stride like gods. And let this inspiration of old Handel penetrate your restless heart
and give it peace. Just listen, you poor creature, listen without either pathos or mockery, while
far away behind the veil of this hopelessly idiotic and ridiculous apparatus the form of this divine
music passes by. Pay attention and you will learn something. Observe how this crazy funnel
apparently does the most stupid, the most useless and the most damnable thing in the world. It
takes hold of some music played where you please, without distinction, stupid and coarse,
lamentably distorted, to boot, and chucks it into space to land where it has no business to be; and
yet after all this it cannot destroy the original spirit of the music; it can only demonstrate its own
senseless mechanism, its inane meddling and marring. Listen, then, you poor thing. Listen well.

You have need of it. And now you hear not only a Handel who, disfigured by radio, is, all the
same, in this most ghastly of disguises still divine; you hear as well and you observe, most
worthy sir, a most admirable symbol of all life. When you listen to radio you are a witness of the
everlasting war between idea and appearance, between time and eternity, between the human and
the divine. Exactly, my dear sir, as the radio for ten minutes together projects the most lovely
music without regard into the most impossible places, into respectable drawing rooms and attics
and into the midst of chattering, guzzling, yawning and sleeping listeners, and exactly as it strips
this music of its sensuous beauty, spoils and scratches and beslimes it and yet cannot altogether
destroy its spirit, just so does life, the so-called reality, deal with the sublime picture-play of the
world and make a hurley-burley of it. It makes its unappetizing tone—slime of the most magic
orchestral music. Everywhere it obtrudes its mechanism, its activity, its dreary exigencies and
vanity between the ideal and the real, between orchestra and ear. All life is so, my child, and we
must let it be so; and, if we are not asses, laugh at it. It little becomes people like you to be critics
of radio or of life either. Better learn to listen first! Learn what is to be taken seriously and laugh
at the rest. Or is it that you have done better yourself, more nobly and fitly and with better taste?
Oh, no, Mr. Harry, you have not. You have made a frightful history of disease out of your life,
and a misfortune of your gifts. And you have, as I see, found no better use for so pretty, so
enchanting a young lady than to stick a knife into her body and destroy her. Was that right, do
you think?"
"Right?" I cried in despair. "No! My God, everything is so false, so hellishly stupid and
wrong! I am a beast, Mozart, a stupid, angry beast, sick and rotten. There you're right a thousand
times. But as for this girl—it was her own desire. I have only fulfilled her own wish."
Mozart laughed his noiseless laughter. But he had the great kindness to turn off the radio.
My self-extenuation sounded unexpectedly and thoroughly foolish even to me who had
believed in it with all my heart. When Hermine had once, so it suddenly occurred to me, spoken
about time and eternity, I had been ready forthwith to take her thoughts as a reflection of my
own. That the thought, however, of dying by my hand had been her own inspiration and wish
and not in the least influenced by me I had taken as a matter of course. But why on that occasion
had I not only accepted that horrible and unnatural thought, but even guessed it in advance.
Perhaps because it had been my own. And why had I murdered Hermine just at the very moment
when I saw her lying naked in another's arms? All-knowing and all-mocking rang Mozart's
soundless laughter.
"Harry," said he, "you're a great joker. Had this beautiful girl really nothing to desire of you
but the stab of a knife? Keep that for someone else! Well, at least you have stabbed her properly.
The poor child is stone dead. And now perhaps would be an opportune moment to realize the
consequences of your gallantry towards this lady. Or do you think of evading the
consequences?"
"No," I cried. "Don't you understand at all? I evade the consequences? I have no other desire
than to pay and pay and pay for them, to lay my head beneath the axe and pay the penalty of
annihilation."
Mozart looked at me with intolerable mockery.
"How pathetic you always are. But you will learn humor yet, Harry. Humor is always
gallows-humor, and it is on the gallows you are now constrained to learn it. You are ready?
Good. Then off with you to the public prosecutor and let the law take its course with you till
your head is coolly hacked off at break of dawn in the prison yard. You are ready for it?"
Instantly a notice flashed before my eyes:
HARRY'S EXECUTION
and I consented with a nod. I stood in a bare yard enclosed by four walls with barred windows,
and shivered in the air of a gray dawn. There were a dozen gentlemen there in morning coats and

gowns, and a newly erected guillotine. My heart was contracted with misery and dread, but I was
ready and acquiescent. At the word of command I stepped forward and at the word of command
I knelt down. The public prosecutor removed his cap and cleared his throat and all the other
gentlemen cleared their throats. He unfolded an official document and held it before him and
read out:
"Gentlemen, there stands before you Harry Haller, accused and found guilty of the willful
misuse of our Magic Theater. Haller has not alone insulted the majesty of art in that he
confounded our beautiful picture gallery with so-called reality and stabbed to death the reflection
of a girl with the reflection of a knife; he has in addition displayed the intention of using our
theater as a mechanism of suicide and shown himself devoid of humor. Wherefore we condemn
Haller to eternal life and we suspend for twelve hours his permit to enter our theater. The penalty
also of being laughed out of court may not be remitted. Gentlemen, all together, one-two-three!"
On the word "three" all who were present broke into one simultaneous peal of laughter, a
laughter in full chorus, a frightful laughter of the other world that is scarcely to be borne by the
ears of men.
When I came to myself again, Mozart was sitting beside me as before. He clapped me on the
shoulder and said: "You have heard your sentence. So, you see, you will have to learn to listen to
more of the radio music of life. It'll do you good. You are uncommonly poor in gifts, a poor
blockhead, but by degrees you will come to grasp what is required of you. You have got to learn
to laugh. That will be required of you. You must apprehend the humor of life, its gallows-humor.
But of course you are ready for everything in the world except what will be required of you. You
are ready to stab girls to death. You are ready to be executed with all solemnity. You would be
ready, no doubt, to mortify and scourge yourself for centuries together. Wouldn't you?"
"Oh, yes, ready with all my heart," I cried in my misery.
"Of course! When it's a question of anything stupid and pathetic and devoid of humor or wit,
you're the man, you tragedian. Well, I am not. I don't care a fig for all your romantics of
atonement. You wanted to be executed and to have your head chopped off, you lunatic! For this
imbecile ideal you would suffer death ten times over. You are willing to die, you coward, but not
to live. The devil, but you shall live! It would serve you right if you were condemned to the
severest of penalties."
"Oh, and what would that be?"
"We might, for example, restore this girl to life again and marry you to her."
"No, I should not be ready for that. It would bring unhappiness."
"As if there were not enough unhappiness in all you have designed already! However, enough
of pathos and death-dealing. It is time to come to your senses. You are to live and to learn to
laugh. You are to learn to listen to the cursed radio music of life and to reverence the spirit
behind it and to laugh at its distortions. So there you are. More will not be asked of you."
Gently from behind clenched teeth I asked: "And if I do not submit? And if I deny your right,
Mozart, to interfere with the Steppenwolf, and to meddle in his destiny?"
"Then," said Mozart calmly, "I should invite you to smoke another of my charming
cigarettes." And as he spoke and conjured up a cigarette from his waistcoat pocket and offered it
me, he was suddenly Mozart no longer. It was my friend Pablo looking warmly at me out of his
dark exotic eyes and as like the man who had taught me to play chess with the little figures as a
twin.
"Pablo!" I cried with a convulsive start. "Pablo, where are we?"
"We are in my Magic Theater," he said with a smile, "and if you wish at any time to learn the
Tango or to be a general or to have a talk with Alexander the Great, it is always at your service.
But I'm bound to say, Harry, you have disappointed me a little. You forgot yourself badly. You
broke through the humor of my little theater and tried to make a mess of it, stabbing with knives
and spattering our pretty picture-world with the mud of reality. That was not pretty of you. I
hope, at least, you did it from jealousy when you saw Hermine and me lying there.

Unfortunately, you did not know what to do with this figure. I thought you had learned the game
better. Well, you will do better next time."
He took Hermine who at once shrank in his fingers to the dimensions of a toy figure and put
her in the very same waistcoat pocket from which he had taken the cigarette.
Its sweet and heavy smoke diffused a pleasant aroma. I felt hollow, exhausted, and ready to
sleep for a whole year.
I understood it all. I understood Pablo. I understood Mozart, and somewhere behind me I
heard his ghastly laughter. I knew that all the hundred thousand pieces of life's game were in my
pocket. A glimpse of its meaning had stirred my reason and I was determined to begin the game
afresh. I would sample its tortures once more and shudder again at its senselessness. I would
traverse not once more, but often, the hell of my inner being.
One day I would be a better hand at the game. One day I would learn how to laugh. Pablo was
waiting for me, and Mozart too.

In the shade of the house, in the sunshine of the riverbank near the boats,
in the shade of the Sal-wood forest, in the shade of the fig tree is where
Siddhartha grew up, the handsome son of the Brahman, the young falcon,
together with his friend Govinda, son of a Brahman. The sun tanned his
light shoulders by the banks of the river when bathing, performing the
sacred ablutions, the sacred offerings. In the mango grove, shade poured
into his black eyes, when playing as a boy, when his mother sang, when the
sacred offerings were made, when his father, the scholar, taught him, when
the wise men talked. For a long time, Siddhartha had been partaking in the
discussions of the wise men, practising debate with Govinda, practising
with Govinda the art of reflection, the service of meditation. He already
knew how to speak the Om silently, the word of words, to speak it silently
into himself while inhaling, to speak it silently out of himself while
exhaling, with all the concentration of his soul, the forehead surrounded by
the glow of the clear-thinking spirit. He already knew to feel Atman in the
depths of his being, indestructible, one with the universe.
Joy leapt in his father’s heart for his son who was quick to learn, thirsty
for knowledge; he saw him growing up to become great wise man and
priest, a prince among the Brahmans.
Bliss leapt in his mother’s breast when she saw him, when she saw him
walking, when she saw him sit down and get up, Siddhartha, strong,
handsome, he who was walking on slender legs, greeting her with perfect
respect.
Love touched the hearts of the Brahmans’ young daughters when
Siddhartha walked through the lanes of the town with the luminous
forehead, with the eye of a king, with his slim hips.
But more than all the others he was loved by Govinda, his friend, the son
of a Brahman. He loved Siddhartha’s eye and sweet voice, he loved his

walk and the perfect decency of his movements, he loved everything
Siddhartha did and said and what he loved most was his spirit, his
transcendent, fiery thoughts, his ardent will, his high calling. Govinda
knew: he would not become a common Brahman, not a lazy official in
charge of offerings; not a greedy merchant with magic spells; not a vain,
vacuous speaker; not a mean, deceitful priest; and also not a decent, stupid
sheep in the herd of the many. No, and he, Govinda, as well did not want to
become one of those, not one of those tens of thousands of Brahmans. He
wanted to follow Siddhartha, the beloved, the splendid. And in days to
come, when Siddhartha would become a god, when he would join the
glorious, then Govinda wanted to follow him as his friend, his companion,
his servant, his spear-carrier, his shadow.
Siddhartha was thus loved by everyone. He was a source of joy for
everybody, he was a delight for them all.
But he, Siddhartha, was not a source of joy for himself, he found no
delight in himself. Walking the rosy paths of the fig tree garden, sitting in
the bluish shade of the grove of contemplation, washing his limbs daily in
the bath of repentance, sacrificing in the dim shade of the mango forest, his
gestures of perfect decency, everyone’s love and joy, he still lacked all joy
in his heart. Dreams and restless thoughts came into his mind, flowing from
the water of the river, sparkling from the stars of the night, melting from the
beams of the sun, dreams came to him and a restlessness of the soul, fuming
from the sacrifices, breathing forth from the verses of the Rig-Veda, being
infused into him, drop by drop, from the teachings of the old Brahmans.
Siddhartha had started to nurse discontent in himself, he had started to
feel that the love of his father and the love of his mother, and also the love
of his friend, Govinda, would not bring him joy for ever and ever, would
not nurse him, feed him, satisfy him. He had started to suspect that his
venerable father and his other teachers, that the wise Brahmans had already
revealed to him the most and best of their wisdom, that they had already
filled his expecting vessel with their richness, and the vessel was not full,
the spirit was not content, the soul was not calm, the heart was not satisfied.
The ablutions were good, but they were water, they did not wash off the sin,
they did not heal the spirit’s thirst, they did not relieve the fear in his heart.
The sacrifices and the invocation of the gods were excellent—but was that
all? Did the sacrifices give a happy fortune? And what about the gods? Was

it really Prajapati who had created the world? Was it not the Atman, He, the
only one, the singular one? Were the gods not creations, created like me and
you, subject to time, mortal? Was it therefore good, was it right, was it
meaningful and the highest occupation to make offerings to the gods? For
whom else were offerings to be made, who else was to be worshipped but
Him, the only one, the Atman? And where was Atman to be found, where
did He reside, where did his eternal heart beat, where else but in one’s own
self, in its innermost part, in its indestructible part, which everyone had in
himself? But where, where was this self, this innermost part, this ultimate
part? It was not flesh and bone, it was neither thought nor consciousness,
thus the wisest ones taught. So, where, where was it? To reach this place,
the self, myself, the Atman, there was another way, which was worthwhile
looking for? Alas, and nobody showed this way, nobody knew it, not the
father, and not the teachers and wise men, not the holy sacrificial songs!
They knew everything, the Brahmans and their holy books, they knew
everything, they had taken care of everything and of more than everything,
the creation of the world, the origin of speech, of food, of inhaling, of
exhaling, the arrangement of the senses, the acts of the gods, they knew
infinitely much—but was it valuable to know all of this, not knowing that
one and only thing, the most important thing, the solely important thing?
Surely, many verses of the holy books, particularly in the Upanishades of
Samaveda, spoke of this innermost and ultimate thing, wonderful verses.
“Your soul is the whole world”, was written there, and it was written that
man in his sleep, in his deep sleep, would meet with his innermost part and
would reside in the Atman. Marvellous wisdom was in these verses, all
knowledge of the wisest ones had been collected here in magic words, pure
as honey collected by bees. No, not to be looked down upon was the
tremendous amount of enlightenment which lay here collected and
preserved by innumerable generations of wise Brahmans.—But where were
the Brahmans, where the priests, where the wise men or penitents, who had
succeeded in not just knowing this deepest of all knowledge but also to live
it? Where was the knowledgeable one who wove his spell to bring his
familiarity with the Atman out of the sleep into the state of being awake,
into the life, into every step of the way, into word and deed? Siddhartha
knew many venerable Brahmans, chiefly his father, the pure one, the
scholar, the most venerable one. His father was to be admired, quiet and
noble were his manners, pure his life, wise his words, delicate and noble

thoughts lived behind its brow —but even he, who knew so much, did he
live in blissfulness, did he have peace, was he not also just a searching man,
a thirsty man? Did he not, again and again, have to drink from holy sources,
as a thirsty man, from the offerings, from the books, from the disputes of
the Brahmans? Why did he, the irreproachable one, have to wash off sins
every day, strive for a cleansing every day, over and over every day? Was
not Atman in him, did not the pristine source spring from his heart? It had
to be found, the pristine source in one’s own self, it had to be possessed!
Everything else was searching, was a detour, was getting lost.
Thus were Siddhartha’s thoughts, this was his thirst, this was his
suffering.
Often he spoke to himself from a Chandogya-Upanishad the words:
“Truly, the name of the Brahman is satyam—verily, he who knows such a
thing, will enter the heavenly world every day.” Often, it seemed near, the
heavenly world, but never he had reached it completely, never he had
quenched the ultimate thirst. And among all the wise and wisest men, he
knew and whose instructions he had received, among all of them there was
no one, who had reached it completely, the heavenly world, who had
quenched it completely, the eternal thirst.
“Govinda,” Siddhartha spoke to his friend, “Govinda, my dear, come
with me under the Banyan tree, let’s practise meditation.”
They went to the Banyan tree, they sat down, Siddhartha right here,
Govinda twenty paces away. While putting himself down, ready to speak
the Om, Siddhartha repeated murmuring the verse:
Om is the bow, the arrow is soul, The Brahman is the arrow’s target, That
one should incessantly hit.
After the usual time of the exercise in meditation had passed, Govinda
rose. The evening had come, it was time to perform the evening’s ablution.
He called Siddhartha’s name. Siddhartha did not answer. Siddhartha sat
there lost in thought, his eyes were rigidly focused towards a very distant
target, the tip of his tongue was protruding a little between the teeth, he
seemed not to breathe. Thus sat he, wrapped up in contemplation, thinking
Om, his soul sent after the Brahman as an arrow.
Once, Samanas had travelled through Siddhartha’s town, ascetics on a
pilgrimage, three skinny, withered men, neither old nor young, with dusty
and bloody shoulders, almost naked, scorched by the sun, surrounded by

loneliness, strangers and enemies to the world, strangers and lank jackals in
the realm of humans. Behind them blew a hot scent of quiet passion, of
destructive service, of merciless self-denial.
In the evening, after the hour of contemplation, Siddhartha spoke to
Govinda: “Early tomorrow morning, my friend, Siddhartha will go to the
Samanas. He will become a Samana.”
Govinda turned pale, when he heard these words and read the decision in
the motionless face of his friend, unstoppable like the arrow shot from the
bow. Soon and with the first glance, Govinda realized: Now it is beginning,
now Siddhartha is taking his own way, now his fate is beginning to sprout,
and with his, my own. And he turned pale like a dry banana-skin.
“O Siddhartha,” he exclaimed, “will your father permit you to do that?”
Siddhartha looked over as if he was just waking up. Arrow-fast he read in
Govinda’s soul, read the fear, read the submission.
“O Govinda,” he spoke quietly, “let’s not waste words. Tomorrow, at
daybreak I will begin the life of the Samanas. Speak no more of it.”
Siddhartha entered the chamber, where his father was sitting on a mat of
bast, and stepped behind his father and remained standing there, until his
father felt that someone was standing behind him. Quoth the Brahman: “Is
that you, Siddhartha? Then say what you came to say.”
Quoth Siddhartha: “With your permission, my father. I came to tell you
that it is my longing to leave your house tomorrow and go to the ascetics.
My desire is to become a Samana. May my father not oppose this.”
The Brahman fell silent, and remained silent for so long that the stars in
the small window wandered and changed their relative positions, ’ere the
silence was broken. Silent and motionless stood the son with his arms
folded, silent and motionless sat the father on the mat, and the stars traced
their paths in the sky. Then spoke the father: “Not proper it is for a
Brahman to speak harsh and angry words. But indignation is in my heart. I
wish not to hear this request for a second time from your mouth.”
Slowly, the Brahman rose; Siddhartha stood silently, his arms folded.
“What are you waiting for?” asked the father.
Quoth Siddhartha: “You know what.”

Indignant, the father left the chamber; indignant, he went to his bed and
lay down.
After an hour, since no sleep had come over his eyes, the Brahman stood
up, paced to and fro, and left the house. Through the small window of the
chamber he looked back inside, and there he saw Siddhartha standing, his
arms folded, not moving from his spot. Pale shimmered his bright robe.
With anxiety in his heart, the father returned to his bed.
After another hour, since no sleep had come over his eyes, the Brahman
stood up again, paced to and fro, walked out of the house and saw that the
moon had risen. Through the window of the chamber he looked back inside;
there stood Siddhartha, not moving from his spot, his arms folded,
moonlight reflecting from his bare shins. With worry in his heart, the father
went back to bed.
And he came back after an hour, he came back after two hours, looked
through the small window, saw Siddhartha standing, in the moon light, by
the light of the stars, in the darkness. And he came back hour after hour,
silently, he looked into the chamber, saw him standing in the same place,
filled his heart with anger, filled his heart with unrest, filled his heart with
anguish, filled it with sadness.
And in the night’s last hour, before the day began, he returned, stepped
into the room, saw the young man standing there, who seemed tall and like
a stranger to him.
“Siddhartha,” he spoke, “what are you waiting for?”
“You know what.”
“Will you always stand that way and wait, until it’ll becomes morning,
noon, and evening?”
“I will stand and wait.”
“You will become tired, Siddhartha.”
“I will become tired.”
“You will fall asleep, Siddhartha.”
“I will not fall asleep.”
“You will die, Siddhartha.”
“I will die.”
“And would you rather die, than obey your father?”

“Siddhartha has always obeyed his father.”
“So will you abandon your plan?”
“Siddhartha will do what his father will tell him to do.”
The first light of day shone into the room. The Brahman saw that
Siddhartha was trembling softly in his knees. In Siddhartha’s face he saw no
trembling, his eyes were fixed on a distant spot. Then his father realized
that even now Siddhartha no longer dwelt with him in his home, that he had
already left him.
The Father touched Siddhartha’s shoulder.
“You will,” he spoke, “go into the forest and be a Samana. When you’ll
have found blissfulness in the forest, then come back and teach me to be
blissful. If you’ll find disappointment, then return and let us once again
make offerings to the gods together. Go now and kiss your mother, tell her
where you are going to. But for me it is time to go to the river and to
perform the first ablution.”
He took his hand from the shoulder of his son and went outside.
Siddhartha wavered to the side, as he tried to walk. He put his limbs back
under control, bowed to his father, and went to his mother to do as his
father had said.
As he slowly left on stiff legs in the first light of day the still quiet town,
a shadow rose near the last hut, who had crouched there, and joined the
pilgrim—Govinda.
“You have come,” said Siddhartha and smiled.
“I have come,” said Govinda.

WITH THE SAMANAS
In the evening of this day they caught up with the ascetics, the skinny
Samanas, and offered them their companionship and—obedience. They
were accepted.
Siddhartha gave his garments to a poor Brahman in the street. He wore
nothing more than the loincloth and the earth-coloured, unsown cloak. He
ate only once a day, and never something cooked. He fasted for fifteen days.
He fasted for twenty-eight days. The flesh waned from his thighs and
cheeks. Feverish dreams flickered from his enlarged eyes, long nails grew
slowly on his parched fingers and a dry, shaggy beard grew on his chin. His
glance turned to ice when he encountered women; his mouth twitched with
contempt, when he walked through a city of nicely dressed people. He saw
merchants trading, princes hunting, mourners wailing for their dead, whores
offering themselves, physicians trying to help the sick, priests determining
the most suitable day for seeding, lovers loving, mothers nursing their
children—and all of this was not worthy of one look from his eye, it all lied,
it all stank, it all stank of lies, it all pretended to be meaningful and joyful
and beautiful, and it all was just concealed putrefaction. The world tasted
bitter. Life was torture.
A goal stood before Siddhartha, a single goal: to become empty, empty of
thirst, empty of wishing, empty of dreams, empty of joy and sorrow. Dead
to himself, not to be a self any more, to find tranquility with an emptied
heart, to be open to miracles in unselfish thoughts, that was his goal. Once
all of my self was overcome and had died, once every desire and every urge
was silent in the heart, then the ultimate part of me had to awake, the
innermost of my being, which is no longer my self, the great secret.
Silently, Siddhartha exposed himself to burning rays of the sun directly
above, glowing with pain, glowing with thirst, and stood there, until he
neither felt any pain nor thirst any more. Silently, he stood there in the rainy
season, from his hair the water was dripping over freezing shoulders, over

freezing hips and legs, and the penitent stood there, until he could not feel
the cold in his shoulders and legs any more, until they were silent, until they
were quiet. Silently, he cowered in the thorny bushes, blood dripped from
the burning skin, from festering wounds dripped pus, and Siddhartha stayed
rigidly, stayed motionless, until no blood flowed any more, until nothing
stung any more, until nothing burned any more.
Siddhartha sat upright and learned to breathe sparingly, learned to get
along with only few breathes, learned to stop breathing. He learned,
beginning with the breath, to calm the beat of his heart, learned to reduce
the beats of his heart, until they were only a few and almost none.
Instructed by the oldest of the Samanas, Siddhartha practised self-denial,
practised meditation, according to a new Samana rules. A heron flew over
the bamboo forest—and Siddhartha accepted the heron into his soul, flew
over forest and mountains, was a heron, ate fish, felt the pangs of a heron’s
hunger, spoke the heron’s croak, died a heron’s death. A dead jackal was
lying on the sandy bank, and Siddhartha’s soul slipped inside the body, was
the dead jackal, lay on the banks, got bloated, stank, decayed, was
dismembered by hyaenas, was skinned by vultures, turned into a skeleton,
turned to dust, was blown across the fields. And Siddhartha’s soul returned,
had died, had decayed, was scattered as dust, had tasted the gloomy
intoxication of the cycle, awaited in new thirst like a hunter in the gap,
where he could escape from the cycle, where the end of the causes, where
an eternity without suffering began. He killed his senses, he killed his
memory, he slipped out of his self into thousands of other forms, was an
animal, was carrion, was stone, was wood, was water, and awoke every
time to find his old self again, sun shone or moon, was his self again, turned
round in the cycle, felt thirst, overcame the thirst, felt new thirst.
Siddhartha learned a lot when he was with the Samanas, many ways
leading away from the self he learned to go. He went the way of self-denial
by means of pain, through voluntarily suffering and overcoming pain,
hunger, thirst, tiredness. He went the way of self-denial by means of
meditation, through imagining the mind to be void of all conceptions. These
and other ways he learned to go, a thousand times he left his self, for hours
and days he remained in the non-self. But though the ways led away from
the self, their end nevertheless always led back to the self. Though
Siddhartha fled from the self a thousand times, stayed in nothingness,

stayed in the animal, in the stone, the return was inevitable, inescapable was
the hour, when he found himself back in the sunshine or in the moonlight,
in the shade or in the rain, and was once again his self and Siddhartha, and
again felt the agony of the cycle which had been forced upon him.
By his side lived Govinda, his shadow, walked the same paths, undertook
the same efforts. They rarely spoke to one another, than the service and the
exercises required. Occasionally the two of them went through the villages,
to beg for food for themselves and their teachers.
“How do you think, Govinda,” Siddhartha spoke one day while begging
this way, “how do you think did we progress? Did we reach any goals?”
Govinda answered: “We have learned, and we’ll continue learning. You’ll
be a great Samana, Siddhartha. Quickly, you’ve learned every exercise,
often the old Samanas have admired you. One day, you’ll be a holy man, oh
Siddhartha.”
Quoth Siddhartha: “I can’t help but feel that it is not like this, my friend.
What I’ve learned, being among the Samanas, up to this day, this, oh
Govinda, I could have learned more quickly and by simpler means. In every
tavern of that part of a town where the whorehouses are, my friend, among
carters and gamblers I could have learned it.”
Quoth Govinda: “Siddhartha is putting me on. How could you have
learned meditation, holding your breath, insensitivity against hunger and
pain there among these wretched people?”
And Siddhartha said quietly, as if he was talking to himself: “What is
meditation? What is leaving one’s body? What is fasting? What is holding
one’s breath? It is fleeing from the self, it is a short escape of the agony of
being a self, it is a short numbing of the senses against the pain and the
pointlessness of life. The same escape, the same short numbing is what the
driver of an ox-cart finds in the inn, drinking a few bowls of rice-wine or
fermented coconut-milk. Then he won’t feel his self any more, then he
won’t feel the pains of life any more, then he finds a short numbing of the
senses. When he falls asleep over his bowl of rice-wine, he’ll find the same
what Siddhartha and Govinda find when they escape their bodies through
long exercises, staying in the non-self. This is how it is, oh Govinda.”
Quoth Govinda: “You say so, oh friend, and yet you know that
Siddhartha is no driver of an ox-cart and a Samana is no drunkard. It’s true
that a drinker numbs his senses, it’s true that he briefly escapes and rests,

but he’ll return from the delusion, finds everything to be unchanged, has not
become wiser, has gathered no enlightenment,—has not risen several
steps.”
And Siddhartha spoke with a smile: “I do not know, I’ve never been a
drunkard. But that I, Siddhartha, find only a short numbing of the senses in
my exercises and meditations and that I am just as far removed from
wisdom, from salvation, as a child in the mother’s womb, this I know, oh
Govinda, this I know.”
And once again, another time, when Siddhartha left the forest together
with Govinda, to beg for some food in the village for their brothers and
teachers, Siddhartha began to speak and said: “What now, oh Govinda,
might we be on the right path? Might we get closer to enlightenment?
Might we get closer to salvation? Or do we perhaps live in a circle—we,
who have thought we were escaping the cycle?”
Quoth Govinda: “We have learned a lot, Siddhartha, there is still much to
learn. We are not going around in circles, we are moving up, the circle is a
spiral, we have already ascended many a level.”
Siddhartha answered: “How old, would you think, is our oldest Samana,
our venerable teacher?”
Quoth Govinda: “Our oldest one might be about sixty years of age.”
And Siddhartha: “He has lived for sixty years and has not reached the
nirvana. He’ll turn seventy and eighty, and you and me, we will grow just as
old and will do our exercises, and will fast, and will meditate. But we will
not reach the nirvana, he won’t and we won’t. Oh Govinda, I believe out of
all the Samanas out there, perhaps not a single one, not a single one, will
reach the nirvana. We find comfort, we find numbness, we learn feats, to
deceive others. But the most important thing, the path of paths, we will not
find.”
“If you only,” spoke Govinda, “wouldn’t speak such terrible words,
Siddhartha! How could it be that among so many learned men, among so
many Brahmans, among so many austere and venerable Samanas, among so
many who are searching, so many who are eagerly trying, so many holy
men, no one will find the path of paths?”
But Siddhartha said in a voice which contained just as much sadness as
mockery, with a quiet, a slightly sad, a slightly mocking voice: “Soon,

Govinda, your friend will leave the path of the Samanas, he has walked
along your side for so long. I’m suffering of thirst, oh Govinda, and on this
long path of a Samana, my thirst has remained as strong as ever. I always
thirsted for knowledge, I have always been full of questions. I have asked
the Brahmans, year after year, and I have asked the holy Vedas, year after
year, and I have asked the devote Samanas, year after year. Perhaps, oh
Govinda, it had been just as well, had been just as smart and just as
profitable, if I had asked the hornbill-bird or the chimpanzee. It took me a
long time and am not finished learning this yet, oh Govinda: that there is
nothing to be learned! There is indeed no such thing, so I believe, as what
we refer to as ‘learning’. There is, oh my friend, just one knowledge, this is
everywhere, this is Atman, this is within me and within you and within
every creature. And so I’m starting to believe that this knowledge has no
worser enemy than the desire to know it, than learning.”
At this, Govinda stopped on the path, rose his hands, and spoke: “If you,
Siddhartha, only would not bother your friend with this kind of talk! Truly,
you words stir up fear in my heart. And just consider: what would become
of the sanctity of prayer, what of the venerability of the Brahmans’ caste,
what of the holiness of the Samanas, if it was as you say, if there was no
learning?! What, oh Siddhartha, what would then become of all of this what
is holy, what is precious, what is venerable on earth?!”
And Govinda mumbled a verse to himself, a verse from an Upanishad:
He who ponderingly, of a purified spirit, loses himself in the meditation
of Atman, unexpressable by words is his blissfulness of his heart.
But Siddhartha remained silent. He thought about the words which
Govinda had said to him and thought the words through to their end.
Yes, he thought, standing there with his head low, what would remain of
all that which seemed to us to be holy? What remains? What can stand the
test? And he shook his head.
At one time, when the two young men had lived among the Samanas for
about three years and had shared their exercises, some news, a rumour, a
myth reached them after being retold many times: A man had appeared,
Gotama by name, the exalted one, the Buddha, he had overcome the
suffering of the world in himself and had halted the cycle of rebirths. He
was said to wander through the land, teaching, surrounded by disciples,
without possession, without home, without a wife, in the yellow cloak of an

ascetic, but with a cheerful brow, a man of bliss, and Brahmans and princes
would bow down before him and would become his students.
This myth, this rumour, this legend resounded, its fragrance rose up, here
and there; in the towns, the Brahmans spoke of it and in the forest, the
Samanas; again and again, the name of Gotama, the Buddha reached the
ears of the young men, with good and with bad talk, with praise and with
defamation.
It was as if the plague had broken out in a country and news had been
spreading around that in one or another place there was a man, a wise man,
a knowledgeable one, whose word and breath was enough to heal everyone
who had been infected with the pestilence, and as such news would go
through the land and everyone would talk about it, many would believe,
many would doubt, but many would get on their way as soon as possible, to
seek the wise man, the helper, just like this myth ran through the land, that
fragrant myth of Gotama, the Buddha, the wise man of the family of Sakya.
He possessed, so the believers said, the highest enlightenment, he
remembered his previous lives, he had reached the nirvana and never
returned into the cycle, was never again submerged in the murky river of
physical forms. Many wonderful and unbelievable things were reported of
him, he had performed miracles, had overcome the devil, had spoken to the
gods. But his enemies and disbelievers said, this Gotama was a vain
seducer, who spent his days in luxury, scorned the offerings, was without
learning, and knew neither exercises nor self-castigation.
The myth of Buddha sounded sweet. The scent of magic flowed from
these reports. After all, the world was sick, life was hard to bear—and
behold, here a source seemed to spring forth, here a messenger seemed to
call out, comforting, mild, full of noble promises. Everywhere where the
rumour of Buddha was heard, everywhere in the lands of India, the young
men listened up, felt a longing, felt hope, and among the Brahmans’ sons of
the towns and villages every pilgrim and stranger was welcome, when he
brought news of him, the exalted one, the Sakyamuni.
The myth had also reached the Samanas in the forest, and also
Siddhartha, and also Govinda, slowly, drop by drop, every drop laden with
hope, every drop laden with doubt. They rarely talked about it, because the
oldest one of the Samanas did not like this myth. He had heard that this
alleged Buddha used to be an ascetic before and had lived in the forest, but

had then turned back to luxury and worldly pleasures, and he had no high
opinion of this Gotama.
“Oh Siddhartha,” Govinda spoke one day to his friend. “Today, I was in
the village, and a Brahman invited me into his house, and in his house, there
was the son of a Brahman from Magadha, who has seen the Buddha with
his own eyes and has heard him teach. Verily, this made my chest ache
when I breathed, and thought to myself: If only I would too, if only we both
would too, Siddhartha and me, live to see the hour when we will hear the
teachings from the mouth of this perfected man! Speak, friend, wouldn’t we
want to go there too and listen to the teachings from the Buddha’s mouth?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “Always, oh Govinda, I had thought, Govinda would
stay with the Samanas, always I had believed his goal was to live to be sixty
and seventy years of age and to keep on practising those feats and exercises,
which are becoming a Samana. But behold, I had not known Govinda well
enough, I knew little of his heart. So now you, my faithful friend, want to
take a new path and go there, where the Buddha spreads his teachings.”
Quoth Govinda: “You’re mocking me. Mock me if you like, Siddhartha!
But have you not also developed a desire, an eagerness, to hear these
teachings? And have you not at one time said to me, you would not walk
the path of the Samanas for much longer?”
At this, Siddhartha laughed in his very own manner, in which his voice
assumed a touch of sadness and a touch of mockery, and said: “Well,
Govinda, you’ve spoken well, you’ve remembered correctly. If you only
remembered the other thing as well, you’ve heard from me, which is that I
have grown distrustful and tired against teachings and learning, and that my
faith in words, which are brought to us by teachers, is small. But let’s do it,
my dear, I am willing to listen to these teachings—though in my heart I
believe that we’ve already tasted the best fruit of these teachings.”
Quoth Govinda: “Your willingness delights my heart. But tell me, how
should this be possible? How should the Gotama’s teachings, even before
we have heard them, have already revealed their best fruit to us?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “Let us eat this fruit and wait for the rest, oh Govinda!
But this fruit, which we already now received thanks to the Gotama,
consisted in him calling us away from the Samanas! Whether he has also
other and better things to give us, oh friend, let us await with calm hearts.”

On this very same day, Siddhartha informed the oldest one of the
Samanas of his decision, that he wanted to leave him. He informed the
oldest one with all the courtesy and modesty becoming to a younger one
and a student. But the Samana became angry, because the two young men
wanted to leave him, and talked loudly and used crude swearwords.
Govinda was startled and became embarrassed. But Siddhartha put his
mouth close to Govinda’s ear and whispered to him: “Now, I want to show
the old man that I’ve learned something from him.”
Positioning himself closely in front of the Samana, with a concentrated
soul, he captured the old man’s glance with his glances, deprived him of his
power, made him mute, took away his free will, subdued him under his own
will, commanded him, to do silently, whatever he demanded him to do. The
old man became mute, his eyes became motionless, his will was paralysed,
his arms were hanging down; without power, he had fallen victim to
Siddhartha’s spell. But Siddhartha’s thoughts brought the Samana under
their control, he had to carry out, what they commanded. And thus, the old
man made several bows, performed gestures of blessing, spoke
stammeringly a godly wish for a good journey. And the young men returned
the bows with thanks, returned the wish, went on their way with salutations.
On the way, Govinda said: “Oh Siddhartha, you have learned more from
the Samanas than I knew. It is hard, it is very hard to cast a spell on an old
Samana. Truly, if you had stayed there, you would soon have learned to
walk on water.”
“I do not seek to walk on water,” said Siddhartha. “Let old Samanas be
content with such feats!”

GOTAMA
In the town of Savathi, every child knew the name of the exalted Buddha,
and every house was prepared to fill the alms-dish of Gotama’s disciples,
the silently begging ones. Near the town was Gotama’s favourite place to
stay, the grove of Jetavana, which the rich merchant Anathapindika, an
obedient worshipper of the exalted one, had given him and his people for a
gift.
All tales and answers, which the two young ascetics had received in their
search for Gotama’s abode, had pointed them towards this area. And
arriving at Savathi, in the very first house, before the door of which they
stopped to beg, food has been offered to them, and they accepted the food,
and Siddhartha asked the woman, who handed them the food:
“We would like to know, oh charitable one, where the Buddha dwells, the
most venerable one, for we are two Samanas from the forest and have
come, to see him, the perfected one, and to hear the teachings from his
mouth.”
Quoth the woman: “Here, you have truly come to the right place, you
Samanas from the forest. You should know, in Jetavana, in the garden of
Anathapindika is where the exalted one dwells. There you pilgrims shall
spend the night, for there is enough space for the innumerable, who flock
here, to hear the teachings from his mouth.”
This made Govinda happy, and full of joy he exclaimed: “Well so, thus
we have reached our destination, and our path has come to an end! But tell
us, oh mother of the pilgrims, do you know him, the Buddha, have you seen
him with your own eyes?”
Quoth the woman: “Many times I have seen him, the exalted one. On
many days, I have seen him, walking through the alleys in silence, wearing
his yellow cloak, presenting his alms-dish in silence at the doors of the
houses, leaving with a filled dish.”

Delightedly, Govinda listened and wanted to ask and hear much more.
But Siddhartha urged him to walk on. They thanked and left and hardly had
to ask for directions, for rather many pilgrims and monks as well from
Gotama’s community were on their way to the Jetavana. And since they
reached it at night, there were constant arrivals, shouts, and talk of those
who sought shelter and got it. The two Samanas, accustomed to life in the
forest, found quickly and without making any noise a place to stay and
rested there until the morning.
At sunrise, they saw with astonishment what a large crowd of believers
and curious people had spent the night here. On all paths of the marvellous
grove, monks walked in yellow robes, under the trees they sat here and
there, in deep contemplation—or in a conversation about spiritual matters,
the shady gardens looked like a city, full of people, bustling like bees. The
majority of the monks went out with their alms-dish, to collect food in town
for their lunch, the only meal of the day. The Buddha himself, the
enlightened one, was also in the habit of taking this walk to beg in the
morning.
Siddhartha saw him, and he instantly recognised him, as if a god had
pointed him out to him. He saw him, a simple man in a yellow robe, bearing
the alms-dish in his hand, walking silently.
“Look here!” Siddhartha said quietly to Govinda. “This one is the
Buddha.”
Attentively, Govinda looked at the monk in the yellow robe, who seemed
to be in no way different from the hundreds of other monks. And soon,
Govinda also realized: This is the one. And they followed him and observed
him.
The Buddha went on his way, modestly and deep in his thoughts, his
calm face was neither happy nor sad, it seemed to smile quietly and
inwardly. With a hidden smile, quiet, calm, somewhat resembling a healthy
child, the Buddha walked, wore the robe and placed his feet just as all of his
monks did, according to a precise rule. But his face and his walk, his quietly
lowered glance, his quietly dangling hand and even every finger of his
quietly dangling hand expressed peace, expressed perfection, did not
search, did not imitate, breathed softly in an unwhithering calm, in an
unwhithering light, an untouchable peace.

Thus Gotama walked towards the town, to collect alms, and the two
Samanas recognised him solely by the perfection of his calm, by the
quietness of his appearance, in which there was no searching, no desire, no
imitation, no effort to be seen, only light and peace.
“Today, we’ll hear the teachings from his mouth,” said Govinda.
Siddhartha did not answer. He felt little curiosity for the teachings, he did
not believe that they would teach him anything new, but he had, just as
Govinda had, heard the contents of this Buddha’s teachings again and again,
though these reports only represented second- or third-hand information.
But attentively he looked at Gotama’s head, his shoulders, his feet, his
quietly dangling hand, and it seemed to him as if every joint of every finger
of this hand was of these teachings, spoke of, breathed of, exhaled the
fragrant of, glistened of truth. This man, this Buddha was truthful down to
the gesture of his last finger. This man was holy. Never before, Siddhartha
had venerated a person so much, never before he had loved a person as
much as this one.
They both followed the Buddha until they reached the town and then
returned in silence, for they themselves intended to abstain from on this
day. They saw Gotama returning—what he ate could not even have satisfied
a bird’s appetite, and they saw him retiring into the shade of the mangotrees.
But in the evening, when the heat cooled down and everyone in the camp
started to bustle about and gathered around, they heard the Buddha
teaching. They heard his voice, and it was also perfected, was of perfect
calmness, was full of peace. Gotama taught the teachings of suffering, of
the origin of suffering, of the way to relieve suffering. Calmly and clearly
his quiet speech flowed on. Suffering was life, full of suffering was the
world, but salvation from suffering had been found: salvation was obtained
by him who would walk the path of the Buddha. With a soft, yet firm voice
the exalted one spoke, taught the four main doctrines, taught the eightfold
path, patiently he went the usual path of the teachings, of the examples, of
the repetitions, brightly and quietly his voice hovered over the listeners, like
a light, like a starry sky.
When the Buddha—night had already fallen—ended his speech, many a
pilgrim stepped forward and asked to be accepted into the community,
sought refuge in the teachings. And Gotama accepted them by speaking:

“You have heard the teachings well, it has come to you well. Thus join us
and walk in holiness, to put an end to all suffering.”
Behold, then Govinda, the shy one, also stepped forward and spoke: “I
also take my refuge in the exalted one and his teachings,” and he asked to
be accepted into the community of his disciples and was accepted.
Right afterwards, when the Buddha had retired for the night, Govinda
turned to Siddhartha and spoke eagerly: “Siddhartha, it is not my place to
scold you. We have both heard the exalted one, we have both perceived the
teachings. Govinda has heard the teachings, he has taken refuge in it. But
you, my honoured friend, don’t you also want to walk the path of salvation?
Would you want to hesitate, do you want to wait any longer?”
Siddhartha awakened as if he had been asleep, when he heard Govinda’s
words. For a long time, he looked into Govinda’s face. Then he spoke
quietly, in a voice without mockery: “Govinda, my friend, now you have
taken this step, now you have chosen this path. Always, oh Govinda,
you’ve been my friend, you’ve always walked one step behind me. Often I
have thought: Won’t Govinda for once also take a step by himself, without
me, out of his own soul? Behold, now you’ve turned into a man and are
choosing your path for yourself. I wish that you would go it up to its end,
oh my friend, that you shall find salvation!”
Govinda, not completely understanding it yet, repeated his question in an
impatient tone: “Speak up, I beg you, my dear! Tell me, since it could not
be any other way, that you also, my learned friend, will take your refuge
with the exalted Buddha!”
Siddhartha placed his hand on Govinda’s shoulder: “You failed to hear
my good wish for you, oh Govinda. I’m repeating it: I wish that you would
go this path up to its end, that you shall find salvation!”
In this moment, Govinda realized that his friend had left him, and he
started to weep.
“Siddhartha!” he exclaimed lamentingly.
Siddhartha kindly spoke to him: “Don’t forget, Govinda, that you are
now one of the Samanas of the Buddha! You have renounced your home
and your parents, renounced your birth and possessions, renounced your
free will, renounced all friendship. This is what the teachings require, this is

what the exalted one wants. This is what you wanted for yourself.
Tomorrow, oh Govinda, I’ll leave you.”
For a long time, the friends continued walking in the grove; for a long
time, they lay there and found no sleep. And over and over again, Govinda
urged his friend, he should tell him why he would not want to seek refuge in
Gotama’s teachings, what fault he would find in these teachings. But
Siddhartha turned him away every time and said: “Be content, Govinda!
Very good are the teachings of the exalted one, how could I find a fault in
them?”
Very early in the morning, a follower of Buddha, one of his oldest
monks, went through the garden and called all those to him who had as
novices taken their refuge in the teachings, to dress them up in the yellow
robe and to instruct them in the first teachings and duties of their position.
Then Govinda broke loose, embraced once again his childhood friend and
left with the novices.
But Siddhartha walked through the grove, lost in thought.
Then he happened to meet Gotama, the exalted one, and when he greeted
him with respect and the Buddha’s glance was so full of kindness and calm,
the young man summoned his courage and asked the venerable one for the
permission to talk to him. Silently the exalted one nodded his approval.
Quoth Siddhartha: “Yesterday, oh exalted one, I had been privileged to
hear your wondrous teachings. Together with my friend, I had come from
afar, to hear your teachings. And now my friend is going to stay with your
people, he has taken his refuge with you. But I will again start on my
pilgrimage.”
“As you please,” the venerable one spoke politely.
“Too bold is my speech,” Siddhartha continued, “but I do not want to
leave the exalted one without having honestly told him my thoughts. Does it
please the venerable one to listen to me for one moment longer?”
Silently, the Buddha nodded his approval.
Quoth Siddhartha: “One thing, oh most venerable one, I have admired in
your teachings most of all. Everything in your teachings is perfectly clear, is
proven; you are presenting the world as a perfect chain, a chain which is
never and nowhere broken, an eternal chain the links of which are causes
and effects. Never before, this has been seen so clearly; never before, this

has been presented so irrefutably; truly, the heart of every Brahman has to
beat stronger with love, once he has seen the world through your teachings
perfectly connected, without gaps, clear as a crystal, not depending on
chance, not depending on gods. Whether it may be good or bad, whether
living according to it would be suffering or joy, I do not wish to discuss,
possibly this is not essential—but the uniformity of the world, that
everything which happens is connected, that the great and the small things
are all encompassed by the same forces of time, by the same law of causes,
of coming into being and of dying, this is what shines brightly out of your
exalted teachings, oh perfected one. But according to your very own
teachings, this unity and necessary sequence of all things is nevertheless
broken in one place, through a small gap, this world of unity is invaded by
something alien, something new, something which had not been there
before, and which cannot be demonstrated and cannot be proven: these are
your teachings of overcoming the world, of salvation. But with this small
gap, with this small breach, the entire eternal and uniform law of the world
is breaking apart again and becomes void. Please forgive me for expressing
this objection.”
Quietly, Gotama had listened to him, unmoved. Now he spoke, the
perfected one, with his kind, with his polite and clear voice: “You’ve heard
the teachings, oh son of a Brahman, and good for you that you’ve thought
about it thus deeply. You’ve found a gap in it, an error. You should think
about this further. But be warned, oh seeker of knowledge, of the thicket of
opinions and of arguing about words. There is nothing to opinions, they
may be beautiful or ugly, smart or foolish, everyone can support them or
discard them. But the teachings, you’ve heard from me, are no opinion, and
their goal is not to explain the world to those who seek knowledge. They
have a different goal; their goal is salvation from suffering. This is what
Gotama teaches, nothing else.”
“I wish that you, oh exalted one, would not be angry with me,” said the
young man. “I have not spoken to you like this to argue with you, to argue
about words. You are truly right, there is little to opinions. But let me say
this one more thing: I have not doubted in you for a single moment. I have
not doubted for a single moment that you are Buddha, that you have
reached the goal, the highest goal towards which so many thousands of
Brahmans and sons of Brahmans are on their way. You have found salvation
from death. It has come to you in the course of your own search, on your

own path, through thoughts, through meditation, through realizations,
through enlightenment. It has not come to you by means of teachings! And
—thus is my thought, oh exalted one,—nobody will obtain salvation by
means of teachings! You will not be able to convey and say to anybody, oh
venerable one, in words and through teachings what has happened to you in
the hour of enlightenment! The teachings of the enlightened Buddha
contain much, it teaches many to live righteously, to avoid evil. But there is
one thing which these so clear, these so venerable teachings do not contain:
they do not contain the mystery of what the exalted one has experienced for
himself, he alone among hundreds of thousands. This is what I have thought
and realized, when I have heard the teachings. This is why I am continuing
my travels—not to seek other, better teachings, for I know there are none,
but to depart from all teachings and all teachers and to reach my goal by
myself or to die. But often, I’ll think of this day, oh exalted one, and of this
hour, when my eyes beheld a holy man.”
The Buddha’s eyes quietly looked to the ground; quietly, in perfect
equanimity his inscrutable face was smiling.
“I wish,” the venerable one spoke slowly, “that your thoughts shall not be
in error, that you shall reach the goal! But tell me: Have you seen the
multitude of my Samanas, my many brothers, who have taken refuge in the
teachings? And do you believe, oh stranger, oh Samana, do you believe that
it would be better for them all the abandon the teachings and to return into
the life the world and of desires?”
“Far is such a thought from my mind,” exclaimed Siddhartha. “I wish
that they shall all stay with the teachings, that they shall reach their goal! It
is not my place to judge another person’s life. Only for myself, for myself
alone, I must decide, I must chose, I must refuse. Salvation from the self is
what we Samanas search for, oh exalted one. If I merely were one of your
disciples, oh venerable one, I’d fear that it might happen to me that only
seemingly, only deceptively my self would be calm and be redeemed, but
that in truth it would live on and grow, for then I had replaced my self with
the teachings, my duty to follow you, my love for you, and the community
of the monks!”
With half of a smile, with an unwavering openness and kindness, Gotama
looked into the stranger’s eyes and bid him to leave with a hardly noticeable
gesture.

“You are wise, oh Samana,” the venerable one spoke. “You know how to
talk wisely, my friend. Be aware of too much wisdom!”
The Buddha turned away, and his glance and half of a smile remained
forever etched in Siddhartha’s memory.
I have never before seen a person glance and smile, sit and walk this way,
he thought; truly, I wish to be able to glance and smile, sit and walk this
way, too, thus free, thus venerable, thus concealed, thus open, thus childlike
and mysterious. Truly, only a person who has succeeded in reaching the
innermost part of his self would glance and walk this way. Well so, I also
will seek to reach the innermost part of my self.
I saw a man, Siddhartha thought, a single man, before whom I would
have to lower my glance. I do not want to lower my glance before any
other, not before any other. No teachings will entice me any more, since this
man’s teachings have not enticed me.
I am deprived by the Buddha, thought Siddhartha, I am deprived, and
even more he has given to me. He has deprived me of my friend, the one
who had believed in me and now believes in him, who had been my shadow
and is now Gotama’s shadow. But he has given me Siddhartha, myself.

AWAKENING
When Siddhartha left the grove, where the Buddha, the perfected one,
stayed behind, where Govinda stayed behind, then he felt that in this grove
his past life also stayed behind and parted from him. He pondered about this
sensation, which filled him completely, as he was slowly walking along. He
pondered deeply, like diving into a deep water he let himself sink down to
the ground of the sensation, down to the place where the causes lie, because
to identify the causes, so it seemed to him, is the very essence of thinking,
and by this alone sensations turn into realizations and are not lost, but
become entities and start to emit like rays of light what is inside of them.
Slowly walking along, Siddhartha pondered. He realized that he was no
youth any more, but had turned into a man. He realized that one thing had
left him, as a snake is left by its old skin, that one thing no longer existed in
him, which had accompanied him throughout his youth and used to be a
part of him: the wish to have teachers and to listen to teachings. He had also
left the last teacher who had appeared on his path, even him, the highest and
wisest teacher, the most holy one, Buddha, he had left him, had to part with
him, was not able to accept his teachings.
Slower, he walked along in his thoughts and asked himself: “But what is
this, what you have sought to learn from teachings and from teachers, and
what they, who have taught you much, were still unable to teach you?” And
he found: “It was the self, the purpose and essence of which I sought to
learn. It was the self, I wanted to free myself from, which I sought to
overcome. But I was not able to overcome it, could only deceive it, could
only flee from it, only hide from it. Truly, no thing in this world has kept
my thoughts thus busy, as this my very own self, this mystery of me being
alive, of me being one and being separated and isolated from all others, of
me being Siddhartha! And there is no thing in this world I know less about
than about me, about Siddhartha!”

Having been pondering while slowly walking along, he now stopped as
these thoughts caught hold of him, and right away another thought sprang
forth from these, a new thought, which was: “That I know nothing about
myself, that Siddhartha has remained thus alien and unknown to me, stems
from one cause, a single cause: I was afraid of myself, I was fleeing from
myself! I searched Atman, I searched Brahman, I was willing to dissect my
self and peel off all of its layers, to find the core of all peels in its unknown
interior, the Atman, life, the divine part, the ultimate part. But I have lost
myself in the process.”
Siddhartha opened his eyes and looked around, a smile filled his face and
a feeling of awakening from long dreams flowed through him from his head
down to his toes. And it was not long before he walked again, walked
quickly like a man who knows what he has got to do.
“Oh,” he thought, taking a deep breath, “now I would not let Siddhartha
escape from me again! No longer, I want to begin my thoughts and my life
with Atman and with the suffering of the world. I do not want to kill and
dissect myself any longer, to find a secret behind the ruins. Neither YogaVeda shall teach me any more, nor Atharva-Veda, nor the ascetics, nor any
kind of teachings. I want to learn from myself, want to be my student, want
to get to know myself, the secret of Siddhartha.”
He looked around, as if he was seeing the world for the first time.
Beautiful was the world, colourful was the world, strange and mysterious
was the world! Here was blue, here was yellow, here was green, the sky and
the river flowed, the forest and the mountains were rigid, all of it was
beautiful, all of it was mysterious and magical, and in its midst was he,
Siddhartha, the awakening one, on the path to himself. All of this, all this
yellow and blue, river and forest, entered Siddhartha for the first time
through the eyes, was no longer a spell of Mara, was no longer the veil of
Maya, was no longer a pointless and coincidental diversity of mere
appearances, despicable to the deeply thinking Brahman, who scorns
diversity, who seeks unity. Blue was blue, river was river, and if also in the
blue and the river, in Siddhartha, the singular and divine lived hidden, so it
was still that very divinity’s way and purpose, to be here yellow, here blue,
there sky, there forest, and here Siddhartha. The purpose and the essential
properties were not somewhere behind the things, they were in them, in
everything.

“How deaf and stupid have I been!” he thought, walking swiftly along.
“When someone reads a text, wants to discover its meaning, he will not
scorn the symbols and letters and call them deceptions, coincidence, and
worthless hull, but he will read them, he will study and love them, letter by
letter. But I, who wanted to read the book of the world and the book of my
own being, I have, for the sake of a meaning I had anticipated before I read,
scorned the symbols and letters, I called the visible world a deception,
called my eyes and my tongue coincidental and worthless forms without
substance. No, this is over, I have awakened, I have indeed awakened and
have not been born before this very day.”
In thinking these thoughts, Siddhartha stopped once again, suddenly, as if
there was a snake lying in front of him on the path.
Because suddenly, he had also become aware of this: He, who was
indeed like someone who had just woken up or like a new-born baby, he
had to start his life anew and start again at the very beginning. When he had
left in this very morning from the grove Jetavana, the grove of that exalted
one, already awakening, already on the path towards himself, he had every
intention, regarded as natural and took for granted, that he, after years as an
ascetic, would return to his home and his father. But now, only in this
moment, when he stopped as if a snake was lying on his path, he also
awoke to this realization: “But I am no longer the one I was, I am no ascetic
any more, I am not a priest any more, I am no Brahman any more.
Whatever should I do at home and at my father’s place? Study? Make
offerings? Practise meditation? But all this is over, all of this is no longer
alongside my path.”
Motionless, Siddhartha remained standing there, and for the time of one
moment and breath, his heart felt cold, he felt a cold in his chest, as a small
animal, a bird or a rabbit, would when seeing how alone he was. For many
years, he had been without home and had felt nothing. Now, he felt it. Still,
even in the deepest meditation, he had been his father’s son, had been a
Brahman, of a high caste, a cleric. Now, he was nothing but Siddhartha, the
awoken one, nothing else was left. Deeply, he inhaled, and for a moment,
he felt cold and shivered. Nobody was thus alone as he was. There was no
nobleman who did not belong to the noblemen, no worker that did not
belong to the workers, and found refuge with them, shared their life, spoke
their language. No Brahman, who would not be regarded as Brahmans and

lived with them, no ascetic who would not find his refuge in the caste of the
Samanas, and even the most forlorn hermit in the forest was not just one
and alone, he was also surrounded by a place he belonged to, he also
belonged to a caste, in which he was at home. Govinda had become a monk,
and a thousand monks were his brothers, wore the same robe as he, believed
in his faith, spoke his language. But he, Siddhartha, where did he belong to?
With whom would he share his life? Whose language would he speak?
Out of this moment, when the world melted away all around him, when
he stood alone like a star in the sky, out of this moment of a cold and
despair, Siddhartha emerged, more a self than before, more firmly
concentrated. He felt: This had been the last tremor of the awakening, the
last struggle of this birth. And it was not long until he walked again in long
strides, started to proceed swiftly and impatiently, heading no longer for
home, no longer to his father, no longer back.

SECOND PART
Dedicated to Wilhelm Gundert, my cousin in Japan

KAMALA
Siddhartha learned something new on every step of his path, for the
world was transformed, and his heart was enchanted. He saw the sun rising
over the mountains with their forests and setting over the distant beach with
its palm-trees. At night, he saw the stars in the sky in their fixed positions
and the crescent of the moon floating like a boat in the blue. He saw trees,
stars, animals, clouds, rainbows, rocks, herbs, flowers, stream and river, the
glistening dew in the bushes in the morning, distant high mountains which
were blue and pale, birds sang and bees, wind silverishly blew through the
rice-field. All of this, a thousand-fold and colourful, had always been there,
always the sun and the moon had shone, always rivers had roared and bees
had buzzed, but in former times all of this had been nothing more to
Siddhartha than a fleeting, deceptive veil before his eyes, looked upon in
distrust, destined to be penetrated and destroyed by thought, since it was not
the essential existence, since this essence lay beyond, on the other side of,
the visible. But now, his liberated eyes stayed on this side, he saw and
became aware of the visible, sought to be at home in this world, did not
search for the true essence, did not aim at a world beyond. Beautiful was
this world, looking at it thus, without searching, thus simply, thus childlike.
Beautiful were the moon and the stars, beautiful was the stream and the
banks, the forest and the rocks, the goat and the gold-beetle, the flower and
the butterfly. Beautiful and lovely it was, thus to walk through the world,
thus childlike, thus awoken, thus open to what is near, thus without distrust.
Differently the sun burnt the head, differently the shade of the forest cooled
him down, differently the stream and the cistern, the pumpkin and the
banana tasted. Short were the days, short the nights, every hour sped swiftly
away like a sail on the sea, and under the sail was a ship full of treasures,
full of joy. Siddhartha saw a group of apes moving through the high canopy
of the forest, high in the branches, and heard their savage, greedy song.
Siddhartha saw a male sheep following a female one and mating with her.

In a lake of reeds, he saw the pike hungrily hunting for its dinner;
propelling themselves away from it, in fear, wiggling and sparkling, the
young fish jumped in droves out of the water; the scent of strength and
passion came forcefully out of the hasty eddies of the water, which the pike
stirred up, impetuously hunting.
All of this had always existed, and he had not seen it; he had not been
with it. Now he was with it, he was part of it. Light and shadow ran through
his eyes, stars and moon ran through his heart.
On the way, Siddhartha also remembered everything he had experienced
in the Garden Jetavana, the teaching he had heard there, the divine Buddha,
the farewell from Govinda, the conversation with the exalted one. Again he
remembered his own words, he had spoken to the exalted one, every word,
and with astonishment he became aware of the fact that there he had said
things which he had not really known yet at this time. What he had said to
Gotama: his, the Buddha’s, treasure and secret was not the teachings, but
the unexpressable and not teachable, which he had experienced in the hour
of his enlightenment—it was nothing but this very thing which he had now
gone to experience, what he now began to experience. Now, he had to
experience his self. It is true that he had already known for a long time that
his self was Atman, in its essence bearing the same eternal characteristics as
Brahman. But never, he had really found this self, because he had wanted to
capture it in the net of thought. With the body definitely not being the self,
and not the spectacle of the senses, so it also was not the thought, not the
rational mind, not the learned wisdom, not the learned ability to draw
conclusions and to develop previous thoughts in to new ones. No, this
world of thought was also still on this side, and nothing could be achieved
by killing the random self of the senses, if the random self of thoughts and
learned knowledge was fattened on the other hand. Both, the thoughts as
well as the senses, were pretty things, the ultimate meaning was hidden
behind both of them, both had to be listened to, both had to be played with,
both neither had to be scorned nor overestimated, from both the secret
voices of the innermost truth had to be attentively perceived. He wanted to
strive for nothing, except for what the voice commanded him to strive for,
dwell on nothing, except where the voice would advise him to do so. Why
had Gotama, at that time, in the hour of all hours, sat down under the botree, where the enlightenment hit him? He had heard a voice, a voice in his
own heart, which had commanded him to seek rest under this tree, and he

had neither preferred self-castigation, offerings, ablutions, nor prayer,
neither food nor drink, neither sleep nor dream, he had obeyed the voice. To
obey like this, not to an external command, only to the voice, to be ready
like this, this was good, this was necessary, nothing else was necessary.
In the night when he slept in the straw hut of a ferryman by the river,
Siddhartha had a dream: Govinda was standing in front of him, dressed in
the yellow robe of an ascetic. Sad was how Govinda looked like, sadly he
asked: Why have you forsaken me? At this, he embraced Govinda, wrapped
his arms around him, and as he was pulling him close to his chest and
kissed him, it was not Govinda any more, but a woman, and a full breast
popped out of the woman’s dress, at which Siddhartha lay and drank,
sweetly and strongly tasted the milk from this breast. It tasted of woman
and man, of sun and forest, of animal and flower, of every fruit, of every
joyful desire. It intoxicated him and rendered him unconscious.—When
Siddhartha woke up, the pale river shimmered through the door of the hut,
and in the forest, a dark call of an owl resounded deeply and pleasantly.
When the day began, Siddhartha asked his host, the ferryman, to get him
across the river. The ferryman got him across the river on his bamboo-raft,
the wide water shimmered reddishly in the light of the morning.
“This is a beautiful river,” he said to his companion.
“Yes,” said the ferryman, “a very beautiful river, I love it more than
anything. Often I have listened to it, often I have looked into its eyes, and
always I have learned from it. Much can be learned from a river.”
“I thank you, my benefactor,” spoke Siddhartha, disembarking on the
other side of the river. “I have no gift I could give you for your hospitality,
my dear, and also no payment for your work. I am a man without a home, a
son of a Brahman and a Samana.”
“I did see it,” spoke the ferryman, “and I haven’t expected any payment
from you and no gift which would be the custom for guests to bear. You
will give me the gift another time.”
“Do you think so?” asked Siddhartha amusedly.
“Surely. This too, I have learned from the river: everything is coming
back! You too, Samana, will come back. Now farewell! Let your friendship
be my reward. Commemorate me, when you’ll make offerings to the gods.”

Smiling, they parted. Smiling, Siddhartha was happy about the friendship
and the kindness of the ferryman. “He is like Govinda,” he thought with a
smile, “all I meet on my path are like Govinda. All are thankful, though
they are the ones who would have a right to receive thanks. All are
submissive, all would like to be friends, like to obey, think little. Like
children are all people.”
At about noon, he came through a village. In front of the mud cottages,
children were rolling about in the street, were playing with pumpkin-seeds
and sea-shells, screamed and wrestled, but they all timidly fled from the
unknown Samana. In the end of the village, the path led through a stream,
and by the side of the stream, a young woman was kneeling and washing
clothes. When Siddhartha greeted her, she lifted her head and looked up to
him with a smile, so that he saw the white in her eyes glistening. He called
out a blessing to her, as it is the custom among travellers, and asked how far
he still had to go to reach the large city. Then she got up and came to him,
beautifully her wet mouth was shimmering in her young face. She
exchanged humorous banter with him, asked whether he had eaten already,
and whether it was true that the Samanas slept alone in the forest at night
and were not allowed to have any women with them. While talking, she put
her left foot on his right one and made a movement as a woman does who
would want to initiate that kind of sexual pleasure with a man, which the
textbooks call “climbing a tree”. Siddhartha felt his blood heating up, and
since in this moment he had to think of his dream again, he bend slightly
down to the woman and kissed with his lips the brown nipple of her breast.
Looking up, he saw her face smiling full of lust and her eyes, with
contracted pupils, begging with desire.
Siddhartha also felt desire and felt the source of his sexuality moving; but
since he had never touched a woman before, he hesitated for a moment,
while his hands were already prepared to reach out for her. And in this
moment he heard, shuddering with awe, the voice of his innermost self, and
this voice said No. Then, all charms disappeared from the young woman’s
smiling face, he no longer saw anything else but the damp glance of a
female animal in heat. Politely, he petted her cheek, turned away from her
and disappeared away from the disappointed woman with light steps into
the bamboo-wood.

On this day, he reached the large city before the evening, and was happy,
for he felt the need to be among people. For a long time, he had lived in the
forests, and the straw hut of the ferryman, in which he had slept that night,
had been the first roof for a long time he had had over his head.
Before the city, in a beautifully fenced grove, the traveller came across a
small group of servants, both male and female, carrying baskets. In their
midst, carried by four servants in an ornamental sedan-chair, sat a woman,
the mistress, on red pillows under a colourful canopy. Siddhartha stopped at
the entrance to the pleasure-garden and watched the parade, saw the
servants, the maids, the baskets, saw the sedan-chair and saw the lady in it.
Under black hair, which made to tower high on her head, he saw a very fair,
very delicate, very smart face, a brightly red mouth, like a freshly cracked
fig, eyebrows which were well tended and painted in a high arch, smart and
watchful dark eyes, a clear, tall neck rising from a green and golden
garment, resting fair hands, long and thin, with wide golden bracelets over
the wrists.
Siddhartha saw how beautiful she was, and his heart rejoiced. He bowed
deeply, when the sedan-chair came closer, and straightening up again, he
looked at the fair, charming face, read for a moment in the smart eyes with
the high arcs above, breathed in a slight fragrant, he did not know. With a
smile, the beautiful woman nodded for a moment and disappeared into the
grove, and then the servants as well.
Thus I am entering this city, Siddhartha thought, with a charming omen.
He instantly felt drawn into the grove, but he thought about it, and only now
he became aware of how the servants and maids had looked at him at the
entrance, how despicable, how distrustful, how rejecting.
I am still a Samana, he thought, I am still an ascetic and beggar. I must
not remain like this, I will not be able to enter the grove like this. And he
laughed.
The next person who came along this path he asked about the grove and
for the name of the woman, and was told that this was the grove of Kamala,
the famous courtesan, and that, aside from the grove, she owned a house in
the city.
Then, he entered the city. Now he had a goal.
Pursuing his goal, he allowed the city to suck him in, drifted through the
flow of the streets, stood still on the squares, rested on the stairs of stone by

the river. When the evening came, he made friends with barber’s assistant,
whom he had seen working in the shade of an arch in a building, whom he
found again praying in a temple of Vishnu, whom he told about stories of
Vishnu and the Lakshmi. Among the boats by the river, he slept this night,
and early in the morning, before the first customers came into his shop, he
had the barber’s assistant shave his beard and cut his hair, comb his hair and
anoint it with fine oil. Then he went to take his bath in the river.
When late in the afternoon, beautiful Kamala approached her grove in
her sedan-chair, Siddhartha was standing at the entrance, made a bow and
received the courtesan’s greeting. But that servant who walked at the very
end of her train he motioned to him and asked him to inform his mistress
that a young Brahman would wish to talk to her. After a while, the servant
returned, asked him, who had been waiting, to follow him, conducted him,
who was following him, without a word into a pavilion, where Kamala was
lying on a couch, and left him alone with her.
“Weren’t you already standing out there yesterday, greeting me?” asked
Kamala.
“It’s true that I’ve already seen and greeted you yesterday.”
“But didn’t you yesterday wear a beard, and long hair, and dust in your
hair?”
“You have observed well, you have seen everything. You have seen
Siddhartha, the son of a Brahman, who has left his home to become a
Samana, and who has been a Samana for three years. But now, I have left
that path and came into this city, and the first one I met, even before I had
entered the city, was you. To say this, I have come to you, oh Kamala! You
are the first woman whom Siddhartha is not addressing with his eyes turned
to the ground. Never again I want to turn my eyes to the ground, when I’m
coming across a beautiful woman.”
Kamala smiled and played with her fan of peacocks’ feathers. And asked:
“And only to tell me this, Siddhartha has come to me?”
“To tell you this and to thank you for being so beautiful. And if it doesn’t
displease you, Kamala, I would like to ask you to be my friend and teacher,
for I know nothing yet of that art which you have mastered in the highest
degree.”
At this, Kamala laughed aloud.

“Never before this has happened to me, my friend, that a Samana from
the forest came to me and wanted to learn from me! Never before this has
happened to me, that a Samana came to me with long hair and an old, torn
loincloth! Many young men come to me, and there are also sons of
Brahmans among them, but they come in beautiful clothes, they come in
fine shoes, they have perfume in their hair and money in their pouches. This
is, oh Samana, how the young men are like who come to me.”
Quoth Siddhartha: “Already I am starting to learn from you. Even
yesterday, I was already learning. I have already taken off my beard, have
combed the hair, have oil in my hair. There is little which is still missing in
me, oh excellent one: fine clothes, fine shoes, money in my pouch. You
shall know, Siddhartha has set harder goals for himself than such trifles, and
he has reached them. How shouldn’t I reach that goal, which I have set for
myself yesterday: to be your friend and to learn the joys of love from you!
You’ll see that I’ll learn quickly, Kamala, I have already learned harder
things than what you’re supposed to teach me. And now let’s get to it: You
aren’t satisfied with Siddhartha as he is, with oil in his hair, but without
clothes, without shoes, without money?”
Laughing, Kamala exclaimed: “No, my dear, he doesn’t satisfy me yet.
Clothes are what he must have, pretty clothes, and shoes, pretty shoes, and
lots of money in his pouch, and gifts for Kamala. Do you know it now,
Samana from the forest? Did you mark my words?”
“Yes, I have marked your words,” Siddhartha exclaimed. “How should I
not mark words which are coming from such a mouth! Your mouth is like a
freshly cracked fig, Kamala. My mouth is red and fresh as well, it will be a
suitable match for yours, you’ll see.—But tell me, beautiful Kamala, aren’t
you at all afraid of the Samana from the forest, who has come to learn how
to make love?”
“Whatever for should I be afraid of a Samana, a stupid Samana from the
forest, who is coming from the jackals and doesn’t even know yet what
women are?”
“Oh, he’s strong, the Samana, and he isn’t afraid of anything. He could
force you, beautiful girl. He could kidnap you. He could hurt you.”
“No, Samana, I am not afraid of this. Did any Samana or Brahman ever
fear, someone might come and grab him and steal his learning, and his
religious devotion, and his depth of thought? No, for they are his very own,

and he would only give away from those whatever he is willing to give and
to whomever he is willing to give. Like this it is, precisely like this it is also
with Kamala and with the pleasures of love. Beautiful and red is Kamala’s
mouth, but just try to kiss it against Kamala’s will, and you will not obtain a
single drop of sweetness from it, which knows how to give so many sweet
things! You are learning easily, Siddhartha, thus you should also learn this:
love can be obtained by begging, buying, receiving it as a gift, finding it in
the street, but it cannot be stolen. In this, you have come up with the wrong
path. No, it would be a pity, if a pretty young man like you would want to
tackle it in such a wrong manner.”
Siddhartha bowed with a smile. “It would be a pity, Kamala, you are so
right! It would be such a great pity. No, I shall not lose a single drop of
sweetness from your mouth, nor you from mine! So it is settled: Siddhartha
will return, once he’ll have what he still lacks: clothes, shoes, money. But
speak, lovely Kamala, couldn’t you still give me one small advice?”
“An advice? Why not? Who wouldn’t like to give an advice to a poor,
ignorant Samana, who is coming from the jackals of the forest?”
“Dear Kamala, thus advise me where I should go to, that I’ll find these
three things most quickly?”
“Friend, many would like to know this. You must do what you’ve learned
and ask for money, clothes, and shoes in return. There is no other way for a
poor man to obtain money. What might you be able to do?”
“I can think. I can wait. I can fast.”
“Nothing else?”
“Nothing. But yes, I can also write poetry. Would you like to give me a
kiss for a poem?”
“I would like to, if I’ll like your poem. What would be its title?”
Siddhartha spoke, after he had thought about it for a moment, these
verses:
Into her shady grove stepped the pretty Kamala, At the grove’s entrance
stood the brown Samana. Deeply, seeing the lotus’s blossom, Bowed that
man, and smiling Kamala thanked. More lovely, thought the young man,
than offerings for gods, More lovely is offering to pretty Kamala.
Kamala loudly clapped her hands, so that the golden bracelets clanged.

“Beautiful are your verses, oh brown Samana, and truly, I’m losing
nothing when I’m giving you a kiss for them.”
She beckoned him with her eyes, he tilted his head so that his face
touched hers and placed his mouth on that mouth which was like a freshly
cracked fig. For a long time, Kamala kissed him, and with a deep
astonishment Siddhartha felt how she taught him, how wise she was, how
she controlled him, rejected him, lured him, and how after this first one
there was to be a long, a well ordered, well tested sequence of kisses, every
one different from the others, he was still to receive. Breathing deeply, he
remained standing where he was, and was in this moment astonished like a
child about the cornucopia of knowledge and things worth learning, which
revealed itself before his eyes.
“Very beautiful are your verses,” exclaimed Kamala, “if I was rich, I
would give you pieces of gold for them. But it will be difficult for you to
earn thus much money with verses as you need. For you need a lot of
money, if you want to be Kamala’s friend.”
“The way you’re able to kiss, Kamala!” stammered Siddhartha.
“Yes, this I am able to do, therefore I do not lack clothes, shoes,
bracelets, and all beautiful things. But what will become of you? Aren’t you
able to do anything else but thinking, fasting, making poetry?”
“I also know the sacrificial songs,” said Siddhartha, “but I do not want to
sing them any more. I also know magic spells, but I do not want to speak
them any more. I have read the scriptures—”
“Stop,” Kamala interrupted him. “You’re able to read? And write?”
“Certainly, I can do this. Many people can do this.”
“Most people can’t. I also can’t do it. It is very good that you’re able to
read and write, very good. You will also still find use for the magic spells.”
In this moment, a maid came running in and whispered a message into
her mistress’s ear.
“There’s a visitor for me,” exclaimed Kamala. “Hurry and get yourself
away, Siddhartha, nobody may see you in here, remember this! Tomorrow,
I’ll see you again.”
But to the maid she gave the order to give the pious Brahman white
upper garments. Without fully understanding what was happening to him,
Siddhartha found himself being dragged away by the maid, brought into a

garden-house avoiding the direct path, being given upper garments as a gift,
led into the bushes, and urgently admonished to get himself out of the grove
as soon as possible without being seen.
Contently, he did as he had been told. Being accustomed to the forest, he
managed to get out of the grove and over the hedge without making a
sound. Contently, he returned to the city, carrying the rolled up garments
under his arm. At the inn, where travellers stay, he positioned himself by
the door, without words he asked for food, without a word he accepted a
piece of rice-cake. Perhaps as soon as tomorrow, he thought, I will ask no
one for food any more.
Suddenly, pride flared up in him. He was no Samana any more, it was no
longer becoming to him to beg. He gave the rice-cake to a dog and
remained without food.
“Simple is the life which people lead in this world here,” thought
Siddhartha. “It presents no difficulties. Everything was difficult, toilsome,
and ultimately hopeless, when I was still a Samana. Now, everything is
easy, easy like that lesson in kissing, which Kamala is giving me. I need
clothes and money, nothing else; these are small, near goals, they won’t
make a person lose any sleep.”
He had already discovered Kamala’s house in the city long before, there
he turned up the following day.
“Things are working out well,” she called out to him. “They are
expecting you at Kamaswami’s, he is the richest merchant of the city. If
he’ll like you, he’ll accept you into his service. Be smart, brown Samana. I
had others tell him about you. Be polite towards him, he is very powerful.
But don’t be too modest! I do not want you to become his servant, you shall
become his equal, or else I won’t be satisfied with you. Kamaswami is
starting to get old and lazy. If he’ll like you, he’ll entrust you with a lot.”
Siddhartha thanked her and laughed, and when she found out that he had
not eaten anything yesterday and today, she sent for bread and fruits and
treated him to it.
“You’ve been lucky,” she said when they parted, “I’m opening one door
after another for you. How come? Do you have a spell?”
Siddhartha said: “Yesterday, I told you I knew how to think, to wait, and
to fast, but you thought this was of no use. But it is useful for many things,

Kamala, you’ll see. You’ll see that the stupid Samanas are learning and able
to do many pretty things in the forest, which the likes of you aren’t capable
of. The day before yesterday, I was still a shaggy beggar, as soon as
yesterday I have kissed Kamala, and soon I’ll be a merchant and have
money and all those things you insist upon.”
“Well yes,” she admitted. “But where would you be without me? What
would you be, if Kamala wasn’t helping you?”
“Dear Kamala,” said Siddhartha and straightened up to his full height,
“when I came to you into your grove, I did the first step. It was my
resolution to learn love from this most beautiful woman. From that moment
on when I had made this resolution, I also knew that I would carry it out. I
knew that you would help me, at your first glance at the entrance of the
grove I already knew it.”
“But what if I hadn’t been willing?”
“You were willing. Look, Kamala: When you throw a rock into the water,
it will speed on the fastest course to the bottom of the water. This is how it
is when Siddhartha has a goal, a resolution. Siddhartha does nothing, he
waits, he thinks, he fasts, but he passes through the things of the world like
a rock through water, without doing anything, without stirring; he is drawn,
he lets himself fall. His goal attracts him, because he doesn’t let anything
enter his soul which might oppose the goal. This is what Siddhartha has
learned among the Samanas. This is what fools call magic and of which
they think it would be effected by means of the daemons. Nothing is
effected by daemons, there are no daemons. Everyone can perform magic,
everyone can reach his goals, if he is able to think, if he is able to wait, if he
is able to fast.”
Kamala listened to him. She loved his voice, she loved the look from his
eyes.
“Perhaps it is so,” she said quietly, “as you say, friend. But perhaps it is
also like this: that Siddhartha is a handsome man, that his glance pleases the
women, that therefore good fortune is coming towards him.”
With one kiss, Siddhartha bid his farewell. “I wish that it should be this
way, my teacher; that my glance shall please you, that always good fortune
shall come to me out of your direction!”

WITH THE CHILDLIKE PEOPLE
Siddhartha went to Kamaswami the merchant, he was directed into a rich
house, servants led him between precious carpets into a chamber, where he
awaited the master of the house.
Kamaswami entered, a swiftly, smoothly moving man with very gray
hair, with very intelligent, cautious eyes, with a greedy mouth. Politely, the
host and the guest greeted one another.
“I have been told,” the merchant began, “that you were a Brahman, a
learned man, but that you seek to be in the service of a merchant. Might you
have become destitute, Brahman, so that you seek to serve?”
“No,” said Siddhartha, “I have not become destitute and have never been
destitute. You should know that I’m coming from the Samanas, with whom
I have lived for a long time.”
“If you’re coming from the Samanas, how could you be anything but
destitute? Aren’t the Samanas entirely without possessions?”
“I am without possessions,” said Siddhartha, “if this is what you mean.
Surely, I am without possessions. But I am so voluntarily, and therefore I
am not destitute.”
“But what are you planning to live of, being without possessions?”
“I haven’t thought of this yet, sir. For more than three years, I have been
without possessions, and have never thought about of what I should live.”
“So you’ve lived of the possessions of others.”
“Presumable this is how it is. After all, a merchant also lives of what
other people own.”
“Well said. But he wouldn’t take anything from another person for
nothing; he would give his merchandise in return.”
“So it seems to be indeed. Everyone takes, everyone gives, such is life.”

“But if you don’t mind me asking: being without possessions, what
would you like to give?”
“Everyone gives what he has. The warrior gives strength, the merchant
gives merchandise, the teacher teachings, the farmer rice, the fisher fish.”
“Yes indeed. And what is it now what you’ve got to give? What is it that
you’ve learned, what you’re able to do?”
“I can think. I can wait. I can fast.”
“That’s everything?”
“I believe, that’s everything!”
“And what’s the use of that? For example, the fasting—what is it good
for?”
“It is very good, sir. When a person has nothing to eat, fasting is the
smartest thing he could do. When, for example, Siddhartha hadn’t learned
to fast, he would have to accept any kind of service before this day is up,
whether it may be with you or wherever, because hunger would force him
to do so. But like this, Siddhartha can wait calmly, he knows no impatience,
he knows no emergency, for a long time he can allow hunger to besiege him
and can laugh about it. This, sir, is what fasting is good for.”
“You’re right, Samana. Wait for a moment.”
Kamaswami left the room and returned with a scroll, which he handed to
his guest while asking: “Can you read this?”
Siddhartha looked at the scroll, on which a sales-contract had been
written down, and began to read out its contents.
“Excellent,” said Kamaswami. “And would you write something for me
on this piece of paper?”
He handed him a piece of paper and a pen, and Siddhartha wrote and
returned the paper.
Kamaswami read: “Writing is good, thinking is better. Being smart is
good, being patient is better.”
“It is excellent how you’re able to write,” the merchant praised him.
“Many a thing we will still have to discuss with one another. For today, I’m
asking you to be my guest and to live in this house.”
Siddhartha thanked and accepted, and lived in the dealer’s house from
now on. Clothes were brought to him, and shoes, and every day, a servant

prepared a bath for him. Twice a day, a plentiful meal was served, but
Siddhartha only ate once a day, and ate neither meat nor did he drink wine.
Kamaswami told him about his trade, showed him the merchandise and
storage-rooms, showed him calculations. Siddhartha got to know many new
things, he heard a lot and spoke little. And thinking of Kamala’s words, he
was never subservient to the merchant, forced him to treat him as an equal,
yes even more than an equal. Kamaswami conducted his business with care
and often with passion, but Siddhartha looked upon all of this as if it was a
game, the rules of which he tried hard to learn precisely, but the contents of
which did not touch his heart.
He was not in Kamaswami’s house for long, when he already took part in
his landlord’s business. But daily, at the hour appointed by her, he visited
beautiful Kamala, wearing pretty clothes, fine shoes, and soon he brought
her gifts as well. Much he learned from her red, smart mouth. Much he
learned from her tender, supple hand. Him, who was, regarding love, still a
boy and had a tendency to plunge blindly and insatiably into lust like into a
bottomless pit, him she taught, thoroughly starting with the basics, about
that school of thought which teaches that pleasure cannot be taken without
giving pleasure, and that every gesture, every caress, every touch, every
look, every spot of the body, however small it was, had its secret, which
would bring happiness to those who know about it and unleash it. She
taught him, that lovers must not part from one another after celebrating
love, without one admiring the other, without being just as defeated as they
have been victorious, so that none of them should start feeling fed up or
bored and get that evil feeling of having abused or having been abused.
Wonderful hours he spent with the beautiful and smart artist, became her
student, her lover, her friend. Here with Kamala was the worth and purpose
of his present life, not with the business of Kamaswami.
The merchant passed duties of writing important letters and contracts on
to him and got into the habit of discussing all important affairs with him. He
soon saw that Siddhartha knew little about rice and wool, shipping and
trade, but that he acted in a fortunate manner, and that Siddhartha surpassed
him, the merchant, in calmness and equanimity, and in the art of listening
and deeply understanding previously unknown people. “This Brahman,” he
said to a friend, “is no proper merchant and will never be one, there is never
any passion in his soul when he conducts our business. But he has that
mysterious quality of those people to whom success comes all by itself,

whether this may be a good star of his birth, magic, or something he has
learned among Samanas. He always seems to be merely playing with our
business-affairs, they never fully become a part of him, they never rule over
him, he is never afraid of failure, he is never upset by a loss.”
The friend advised the merchant: “Give him from the business he
conducts for you a third of the profits, but let him also be liable for the same
amount of the losses, when there is a loss. Then, he’ll become more
zealous.”
Kamaswami followed the advice. But Siddhartha cared little about this.
When he made a profit, he accepted it with equanimity; when he made
losses, he laughed and said: “Well, look at this, so this one turned out
badly!”
It seemed indeed, as if he did not care about the business. At one time, he
travelled to a village to buy a large harvest of rice there. But when he got
there, the rice had already been sold to another merchant. Nevertheless,
Siddhartha stayed for several days in that village, treated the farmers for a
drink, gave copper-coins to their children, joined in the celebration of a
wedding, and returned extremely satisfied from his trip. Kamaswami held
against him that he had not turned back right away, that he had wasted time
and money. Siddhartha answered: “Stop scolding, dear friend! Nothing was
ever achieved by scolding. If a loss has occurred, let me bear that loss. I am
very satisfied with this trip. I have gotten to know many kinds of people, a
Brahman has become my friend, children have sat on my knees, farmers
have shown me their fields, nobody knew that I was a merchant.”
“That’s all very nice,” exclaimed Kamaswami indignantly, “but in fact,
you are a merchant after all, one ought to think! Or might you have only
travelled for your amusement?”
“Surely,” Siddhartha laughed, “surely I have travelled for my
amusement. For what else? I have gotten to know people and places, I have
received kindness and trust, I have found friendship. Look, my dear, if I had
been Kamaswami, I would have travelled back, being annoyed and in a
hurry, as soon as I had seen that my purchase had been rendered impossible,
and time and money would indeed have been lost. But like this, I’ve had a
few good days, I’ve learned, had joy, I’ve neither harmed myself nor others
by annoyance and hastiness. And if I’ll ever return there again, perhaps to
buy an upcoming harvest, or for whatever purpose it might be, friendly

people will receive me in a friendly and happy manner, and I will praise
myself for not showing any hurry and displeasure at that time. So, leave it
as it is, my friend, and don’t harm yourself by scolding! If the day will
come, when you will see: this Siddhartha is harming me, then speak a word
and Siddhartha will go on his own path. But until then, let’s be satisfied
with one another.”
Futile were also the merchant’s attempts, to convince Siddhartha that he
should eat his bread. Siddhartha ate his own bread, or rather they both ate
other people’s bread, all people’s bread. Siddhartha never listened to
Kamaswami’s worries and Kamaswami had many worries. Whether there
was a business-deal going on which was in danger of failing, or whether a
shipment of merchandise seemed to have been lost, or a debtor seemed to
be unable to pay, Kamaswami could never convince his partner that it
would be useful to utter a few words of worry or anger, to have wrinkles on
the forehead, to sleep badly. When, one day, Kamaswami held against him
that he had learned everything he knew from him, he replied: “Would you
please not kid me with such jokes! What I’ve learned from you is how
much a basket of fish costs and how much interest may be charged on
loaned money. These are your areas of expertise. I haven’t learned to think
from you, my dear Kamaswami, you ought to be the one seeking to learn
from me.”
Indeed his soul was not with the trade. The business was good enough to
provide him with the money for Kamala, and it earned him much more than
he needed. Besides from this, Siddhartha’s interest and curiosity was only
concerned with the people, whose businesses, crafts, worries, pleasures, and
acts of foolishness used to be as alien and distant to him as the moon.
However easily he succeeded in talking to all of them, in living with all of
them, in learning from all of them, he was still aware that there was
something which separated him from them and this separating factor was
him being a Samana. He saw mankind going through life in a childlike or
animallike manner, which he loved and also despised at the same time. He
saw them toiling, saw them suffering, and becoming gray for the sake of
things which seemed to him entirely unworthy of this price, for money, for
little pleasures, for being slightly honoured, he saw them scolding and
insulting each other, he saw them complaining about pain at which a
Samana would only smile, and suffering because of deprivations which a
Samana would not feel.

He was open to everything these people brought his way. Welcome was
the merchant who offered him linen for sale, welcome was the debtor who
sought another loan, welcome was the beggar who told him for one hour the
story of his poverty and who was not half as poor as any given Samana. He
did not treat the rich foreign merchant any different than the servant who
shaved him and the street-vendor whom he let cheat him out of some small
change when buying bananas. When Kamaswami came to him, to complain
about his worries or to reproach him concerning his business, he listened
curiously and happily, was puzzled by him, tried to understand him,
consented that he was a little bit right, only as much as he considered
indispensable, and turned away from him, towards the next person who
would ask for him. And there were many who came to him, many to do
business with him, many to cheat him, many to draw some secret out of
him, many to appeal to his sympathy, many to get his advice. He gave
advice, he pitied, he made gifts, he let them cheat him a bit, and this entire
game and the passion with which all people played this game occupied his
thoughts just as much as the gods and Brahmans used to occupy them.
At times he felt, deep in his chest, a dying, quiet voice, which
admonished him quietly, lamented quietly; he hardly perceived it. And then,
for an hour, he became aware of the strange life he was leading, of him
doing lots of things which were only a game, of, though being happy and
feeling joy at times, real life still passing him by and not touching him. As a
ball-player plays with his balls, he played with his business-deals, with the
people around him, watched them, found amusement in them; with his
heart, with the source of his being, he was not with them. The source ran
somewhere, far away from him, ran and ran invisibly, had nothing to do
with his life any more. And at several times he suddenly became scared on
account of such thoughts and wished that he would also be gifted with the
ability to participate in all of these childlike-naive occupations of the
daytime with passion and with his heart, really to live, really to act, really to
enjoy and to live instead of just standing by as a spectator. But again and
again, he came back to beautiful Kamala, learned the art of love, practised
the cult of lust, in which more than in anything else giving and taking
becomes one, chatted with her, learned from her, gave her advice, received
advice. She understood him better than Govinda used to understand him,
she was more similar to him.

Once, he said to her: “You are like me, you are different from most
people. You are Kamala, nothing else, and inside of you, there is a peace
and refuge, to which you can go at every hour of the day and be at home at
yourself, as I can also do. Few people have this, and yet all could have it.”
“Not all people are smart,” said Kamala.
“No,” said Siddhartha, “that’s not the reason why. Kamaswami is just as
smart as I, and still has no refuge in himself. Others have it, who are small
children with respect to their mind. Most people, Kamala, are like a falling
leaf, which is blown and is turning around through the air, and wavers, and
tumbles to the ground. But others, a few, are like stars, they go on a fixed
course, no wind reaches them, in themselves they have their law and their
course. Among all the learned men and Samanas, of which I knew many,
there was one of this kind, a perfected one, I’ll never be able to forget him.
It is that Gotama, the exalted one, who is spreading those teachings.
Thousands of followers are listening to his teachings every day, follow his
instructions every hour, but they are all falling leaves, not in themselves
they have teachings and a law.”
Kamala looked at him with a smile. “Again, you’re talking about him,”
she said, “again, you’re having a Samana’s thoughts.”
Siddhartha said nothing, and they played the game of love, one of the
thirty or forty different games Kamala knew. Her body was flexible like that
of a jaguar and like the bow of a hunter; he who had learned from her how
to make love, was knowledgeable of many forms of lust, many secrets. For
a long time, she played with Siddhartha, enticed him, rejected him, forced
him, embraced him: enjoyed his masterful skills, until he was defeated and
rested exhausted by her side.
The courtesan bent over him, took a long look at his face, at his eyes,
which had grown tired.
“You are the best lover,” she said thoughtfully, “I ever saw. You’re
stronger than others, more supple, more willing. You’ve learned my art
well, Siddhartha. At some time, when I’ll be older, I’d want to bear your
child. And yet, my dear, you’ve remained a Samana, and yet you do not
love me, you love nobody. Isn’t it so?”
“It might very well be so,” Siddhartha said tiredly. “I am like you. You
also do not love—how else could you practise love as a craft? Perhaps,
people of our kind can’t love. The childlike people can; that’s their secret.”

SANSARA
For a long time, Siddhartha had lived the life of the world and of lust,
though without being a part of it. His senses, which he had killed off in hot
years as a Samana, had awoken again, he had tasted riches, had tasted lust,
had tasted power; nevertheless he had still remained in his heart for a long
time a Samana; Kamala, being smart, had realized this quite right. It was
still the art of thinking, of waiting, of fasting, which guided his life; still the
people of the world, the childlike people, had remained alien to him as he
was alien to them.
Years passed by; surrounded by the good life, Siddhartha hardly felt them
fading away. He had become rich, for quite a while he possessed a house of
his own and his own servants, and a garden before the city by the river. The
people liked him, they came to him, whenever they needed money or
advice, but there was nobody close to him, except Kamala.
That high, bright state of being awake, which he had experienced that
one time at the height of his youth, in those days after Gotama’s sermon,
after the separation from Govinda, that tense expectation, that proud state of
standing alone without teachings and without teachers, that supple
willingness to listen to the divine voice in his own heart, had slowly
become a memory, had been fleeting; distant and quiet, the holy source
murmured, which used to be near, which used to murmur within himself.
Nevertheless, many things he had learned from the Samanas, he had learned
from Gotama, he had learned from his father the Brahman, had remained
within him for a long time afterwards: moderate living, joy of thinking,
hours of meditation, secret knowledge of the self, of his eternal entity,
which is neither body nor consciousness. Many a part of this he still had,
but one part after another had been submerged and had gathered dust. Just
as a potter’s wheel, once it has been set in motion, will keep on turning for a
long time and only slowly lose its vigour and come to a stop, thus
Siddhartha’s soul had kept on turning the wheel of asceticism, the wheel of

thinking, the wheel of differentiation for a long time, still turning, but it
turned slowly and hesitantly and was close to coming to a standstill. Slowly,
like humidity entering the dying stem of a tree, filling it slowly and making
it rot, the world and sloth had entered Siddhartha’s soul, slowly it filled his
soul, made it heavy, made it tired, put it to sleep. On the other hand, his
senses had become alive, there was much they had learned, much they had
experienced.
Siddhartha had learned to trade, to use his power over people, to enjoy
himself with a woman, he had learned to wear beautiful clothes, to give
orders to servants, to bathe in perfumed waters. He had learned to eat
tenderly and carefully prepared food, even fish, even meat and poultry,
spices and sweets, and to drink wine, which causes sloth and forgetfulness.
He had learned to play with dice and on a chess-board, to watch dancing
girls, to have himself carried about in a sedan-chair, to sleep on a soft bed.
But still he had felt different from and superior to the others; always he had
watched them with some mockery, some mocking disdain, with the same
disdain which a Samana constantly feels for the people of the world. When
Kamaswami was ailing, when he was annoyed, when he felt insulted, when
he was vexed by his worries as a merchant, Siddhartha had always watched
it with mockery. Just slowly and imperceptibly, as the harvest seasons and
rainy seasons passed by, his mockery had become more tired, his
superiority had become more quiet. Just slowly, among his growing riches,
Siddhartha had assumed something of the childlike people’s ways for
himself, something of their childlikeness and of their fearfulness. And yet,
he envied them, envied them just the more, the more similar he became to
them. He envied them for the one thing that was missing from him and that
they had, the importance they were able to attach to their lives, the amount
of passion in their joys and fears, the fearful but sweet happiness of being
constantly in love. These people were all of the time in love with
themselves, with women, with their children, with honours or money, with
plans or hopes. But he did not learn this from them, this out of all things,
this joy of a child and this foolishness of a child; he learned from them out
of all things the unpleasant ones, which he himself despised. It happened
more and more often that, in the morning after having had company the
night before, he stayed in bed for a long time, felt unable to think and tired.
It happened that he became angry and impatient, when Kamaswami bored
him with his worries. It happened that he laughed just too loud when he lost

a game of dice. His face was still smarter and more spiritual than others, but
it rarely laughed, and assumed, one after another, those features which are
so often found in the faces of rich people, those features of discontent, of
sickliness, of ill-humour, of sloth, of a lack of love. Slowly the disease of
the soul, which rich people have, grabbed hold of him.
Like a veil, like a thin mist, tiredness came over Siddhartha, slowly,
getting a bit denser every day, a bit murkier every month, a bit heavier
every year. As a new dress becomes old in time, loses its beautiful colour in
time, gets stains, gets wrinkles, gets worn off at the seams, and starts to
show threadbare spots here and there, thus Siddhartha’s new life, which he
had started after his separation from Govinda, had grown old, lost colour
and splendour as the years passed by, was gathering wrinkles and stains,
and hidden at bottom, already showing its ugliness here and there,
disappointment and disgust were waiting. Siddhartha did not notice it. He
only noticed that this bright and reliable voice inside of him, which had
awoken in him at that time and had ever guided him in his best times, had
become silent.
He had been captured by the world, by lust, covetousness, sloth, and
finally also by that vice which he had used to despise and mock the most as
the most foolish one of all vices: greed. Property, possessions, and riches
also had finally captured him; they were no longer a game and trifles to
him, had become a shackle and a burden. In a strange and devious way,
Siddhartha had gotten into this final and most base of all dependencies, by
means of the game of dice. It was since that time, when he had stopped
being a Samana in his heart, that Siddhartha began to play the game for
money and precious things, which he at other times only joined with a smile
and casually as a custom of the childlike people, with an increasing rage
and passion. He was a feared gambler, few dared to take him on, so high
and audacious were his stakes. He played the game due to a pain of his
heart, losing and wasting his wretched money in the game brought him an
angry joy, in no other way he could demonstrate his disdain for wealth, the
merchants’ false god, more clearly and more mockingly. Thus he gambled
with high stakes and mercilessly, hating himself, mocking himself, won
thousands, threw away thousands, lost money, lost jewelry, lost a house in
the country, won again, lost again. That fear, that terrible and petrifying
fear, which he felt while he was rolling the dice, while he was worried
about losing high stakes, that fear he loved and sought to always renew it,

always increase it, always get it to a slightly higher level, for in this feeling
alone he still felt something like happiness, something like an intoxication,
something like an elevated form of life in the midst of his saturated,
lukewarm, dull life.
And after each big loss, his mind was set on new riches, pursued the
trade more zealously, forced his debtors more strictly to pay, because he
wanted to continue gambling, he wanted to continue squandering, continue
demonstrating his disdain of wealth. Siddhartha lost his calmness when
losses occurred, lost his patience when he was not paid on time, lost his
kindness towards beggars, lost his disposition for giving away and loaning
money to those who petitioned him. He, who gambled away tens of
thousands at one roll of the dice and laughed at it, became more strict and
more petty in his business, occasionally dreaming at night about money!
And whenever he woke up from this ugly spell, whenever he found his face
in the mirror at the bedroom’s wall to have aged and become more ugly,
whenever embarrassment and disgust came over him, he continued fleeing,
fleeing into a new game, fleeing into a numbing of his mind brought on by
sex, by wine, and from there he fled back into the urge to pile up and obtain
possessions. In this pointless cycle he ran, growing tired, growing old,
growing ill.
Then the time came when a dream warned him. He had spent the hours of
the evening with Kamala, in her beautiful pleasure-garden. They had been
sitting under the trees, talking, and Kamala had said thoughtful words,
words behind which a sadness and tiredness lay hidden. She had asked him
to tell her about Gotama, and could not hear enough of him, how clear his
eyes, how still and beautiful his mouth, how kind his smile, how peaceful
his walk had been. For a long time, he had to tell her about the exalted
Buddha, and Kamala had sighed and had said: “One day, perhaps soon, I’ll
also follow that Buddha. I’ll give him my pleasure-garden for a gift and
take my refuge in his teachings.” But after this, she had aroused him, and
had tied him to her in the act of making love with painful fervour, biting
and in tears, as if, once more, she wanted to squeeze the last sweet drop out
of this vain, fleeting pleasure. Never before, it had become so strangely
clear to Siddhartha, how closely lust was akin to death. Then he had lain by
her side, and Kamala’s face had been close to him, and under her eyes and
next to the corners of her mouth he had, as clearly as never before, read a
fearful inscription, an inscription of small lines, of slight grooves, an

inscription reminiscent of autumn and old age, just as Siddhartha himself,
who was only in his forties, had already noticed, here and there, gray hairs
among his black ones. Tiredness was written on Kamala’s beautiful face,
tiredness from walking a long path, which has no happy destination,
tiredness and the beginning of withering, and concealed, still unsaid,
perhaps not even conscious anxiety: fear of old age, fear of the autumn, fear
of having to die. With a sigh, he had bid his farewell to her, the soul full of
reluctance, and full of concealed anxiety.
Then, Siddhartha had spent the night in his house with dancing girls and
wine, had acted as if he was superior to them, towards the fellow-members
of his caste, though this was no longer true, had drunk much wine and gone
to bed a long time after midnight, being tired and yet excited, close to
weeping and despair, and had for a long time sought to sleep in vain, his
heart full of misery which he thought he could not bear any longer, full of a
disgust which he felt penetrating his entire body like the lukewarm,
repulsive taste of the wine, the just too sweet, dull music, the just too soft
smile of the dancing girls, the just too sweet scent of their hair and breasts.
But more than by anything else, he was disgusted by himself, by his
perfumed hair, by the smell of wine from his mouth, by the flabby tiredness
and listlessness of his skin. Like when someone, who has eaten and drunk
far too much, vomits it back up again with agonising pain and is
nevertheless glad about the relief, thus this sleepless man wished to free
himself of these pleasures, these habits and all of this pointless life and
himself, in an immense burst of disgust. Not until the light of the morning
and the beginning of the first activities in the street before his city-house, he
had slightly fallen asleep, had found for a few moments a half
unconsciousness, a hint of sleep. In those moments, he had a dream:
Kamala owned a small, rare singing bird in a golden cage. Of this bird,
he dreamt. He dreamt: this bird had become mute, who at other times
always used to sing in the morning, and since this arose his attention, he
stepped in front of the cage and looked inside; there the small bird was dead
and lay stiff on the ground. He took it out, weighed it for a moment in his
hand, and then threw it away, out in the street, and in the same moment, he
felt terribly shocked, and his heart hurt, as if he had thrown away from
himself all value and everything good by throwing out this dead bird.

Starting up from this dream, he felt encompassed by a deep sadness.
Worthless, so it seemed to him, worthless and pointless was the way he had
been going through life; nothing which was alive, nothing which was in
some way delicious or worth keeping he had left in his hands. Alone he
stood there and empty like a castaway on the shore.
With a gloomy mind, Siddhartha went to the pleasure-garden he owned,
locked the gate, sat down under a mango-tree, felt death in his heart and
horror in his chest, sat and sensed how everything died in him, withered in
him, came to an end in him. By and by, he gathered his thoughts, and in his
mind, he once again went the entire path of his life, starting with the first
days he could remember. When was there ever a time when he had
experienced happiness, felt a true bliss? Oh yes, several times he had
experienced such a thing. In his years as a boy, he had had a taste of it,
when he had obtained praise from the Brahmans, he had felt it in his heart:
“There is a path in front of the one who has distinguished himself in the
recitation of the holy verses, in the dispute with the learned ones, as an
assistant in the offerings.” Then, he had felt it in his heart: “There is a path
in front of you, you are destined for, the gods are awaiting you.” And again,
as a young man, when the ever rising, upward fleeing, goal of all thinking
had ripped him out of and up from the multitude of those seeking the same
goal, when he wrestled in pain for the purpose of Brahman, when every
obtained knowledge only kindled new thirst in him, then again he had, in
the midst of the thirst, in the midst of the pain felt this very same thing: “Go
on! Go on! You are called upon!” He had heard this voice when he had left
his home and had chosen the life of a Samana, and again when he had gone
away from the Samanas to that perfected one, and also when he had gone
away from him to the uncertain. For how long had he not heard this voice
any more, for how long had he reached no height any more, how even and
dull was the manner in which his path had passed through life, for many
long years, without a high goal, without thirst, without elevation, content
with small lustful pleasures and yet never satisfied! For all of these many
years, without knowing it himself, he had tried hard and longed to become a
man like those many, like those children, and in all this, his life had been
much more miserable and poorer than theirs, and their goals were not his,
nor their worries; after all, that entire world of the Kamaswami-people had
only been a game to him, a dance he would watch, a comedy. Only Kamala
had been dear, had been valuable to him—but was she still thus? Did he

still need her, or she him? Did they not play a game without an ending? Was
it necessary to live for this? No, it was not necessary! The name of this
game was Sansara, a game for children, a game which was perhaps
enjoyable to play once, twice, ten times—but for ever and ever over again?
Then, Siddhartha knew that the game was over, that he could not play it
any more. Shivers ran over his body, inside of him, so he felt, something
had died.
That entire day, he sat under the mango-tree, thinking of his father,
thinking of Govinda, thinking of Gotama. Did he have to leave them to
become a Kamaswami? He still sat there, when the night had fallen. When,
looking up, he caught sight of the stars, he thought: “Here I’m sitting under
my mango-tree, in my pleasure-garden.” He smiled a little—was it really
necessary, was it right, was it not as foolish game, that he owned a mangotree, that he owned a garden?
He also put an end to this, this also died in him. He rose, bid his farewell
to the mango-tree, his farewell to the pleasure-garden. Since he had been
without food this day, he felt strong hunger, and thought of his house in the
city, of his chamber and bed, of the table with the meals on it. He smiled
tiredly, shook himself, and bid his farewell to these things.
In the same hour of the night, Siddhartha left his garden, left the city, and
never came back. For a long time, Kamaswami had people look for him,
thinking that he had fallen into the hands of robbers. Kamala had no one
look for him. When she was told that Siddhartha had disappeared, she was
not astonished. Did she not always expect it? Was he not a Samana, a man
who was at home nowhere, a pilgrim? And most of all, she had felt this the
last time they had been together, and she was happy, in spite of all the pain
of the loss, that she had pulled him so affectionately to her heart for this last
time, that she had felt one more time to be so completely possessed and
penetrated by him.
When she received the first news of Siddhartha’s disappearance, she went
to the window, where she held a rare singing bird captive in a golden cage.
She opened the door of the cage, took the bird out and let it fly. For a long
time, she gazed after it, the flying bird. From this day on, she received no
more visitors and kept her house locked. But after some time, she became
aware that she was pregnant from the last time she was together with
Siddhartha.

BY THE RIVER
Siddhartha walked through the forest, was already far from the city, and
knew nothing but that one thing, that there was no going back for him, that
this life, as he had lived it for many years until now, was over and done
away with, and that he had tasted all of it, sucked everything out of it until
he was disgusted with it. Dead was the singing bird he had dreamt of. Dead
was the bird in his heart. Deeply, he had been entangled in Sansara, he had
sucked up disgust and death from all sides into his body, like a sponge
sucks up water until it is full. And full he was, full of the feeling of been
sick of it, full of misery, full of death, there was nothing left in this world
which could have attracted him, given him joy, given him comfort.
Passionately he wished to know nothing about himself anymore, to have
rest, to be dead. If there only was a lightning-bolt to strike him dead! If
there only was a tiger to devour him! If there only was a wine, a poison
which would numb his senses, bring him forgetfulness and sleep, and no
awakening from that! Was there still any kind of filth he had not soiled
himself with, a sin or foolish act he had not committed, a dreariness of the
soul he had not brought upon himself? Was it still at all possible to be alive?
Was it possible to breathe in again and again, to breathe out, to feel hunger,
to eat again, to sleep again, to sleep with a woman again? Was this cycle not
exhausted and brought to a conclusion for him?
Siddhartha reached the large river in the forest, the same river over which
a long time ago, when he had still been a young man and came from the
town of Gotama, a ferryman had conducted him. By this river he stopped,
hesitantly he stood at the bank. Tiredness and hunger had weakened him,
and whatever for should he walk on, wherever to, to which goal? No, there
were no more goals, there was nothing left but the deep, painful yearning to
shake off this whole desolate dream, to spit out this stale wine, to put an end
to this miserable and shameful life.

A hang bent over the bank of the river, a coconut-tree; Siddhartha leaned
against its trunk with his shoulder, embraced the trunk with one arm, and
looked down into the green water, which ran and ran under him, looked
down and found himself to be entirely filled with the wish to let go and to
drown in these waters. A frightening emptiness was reflected back at him
by the water, answering to the terrible emptiness in his soul. Yes, he had
reached the end. There was nothing left for him, except to annihilate
himself, except to smash the failure into which he had shaped his life, to
throw it away, before the feet of mockingly laughing gods. This was the
great vomiting he had longed for: death, the smashing to bits of the form he
hated! Let him be food for fishes, this dog Siddhartha, this lunatic, this
depraved and rotten body, this weakened and abused soul! Let him be food
for fishes and crocodiles, let him be chopped to bits by the daemons!
With a distorted face, he stared into the water, saw the reflection of his
face and spit at it. In deep tiredness, he took his arm away from the trunk of
the tree and turned a bit, in order to let himself fall straight down, in order
to finally drown. With his eyes closed, he slipped towards death.
Then, out of remote areas of his soul, out of past times of his now weary
life, a sound stirred up. It was a word, a syllable, which he, without
thinking, with a slurred voice, spoke to himself, the old word which is the
beginning and the end of all prayers of the Brahmans, the holy “Om”,
which roughly means “that what is perfect” or “the completion”. And in the
moment when the sound of “Om” touched Siddhartha’s ear, his dormant
spirit suddenly woke up and realized the foolishness of his actions.
Siddhartha was deeply shocked. So this was how things were with him,
so doomed was he, so much he had lost his way and was forsaken by all
knowledge, that he had been able to seek death, that this wish, this wish of a
child, had been able to grow in him: to find rest by annihilating his body!
What all agony of these recent times, all sobering realizations, all
desperation had not brought about, this was brought on by this moment,
when the Om entered his consciousness: he became aware of himself in his
misery and in his error.
Om! he spoke to himself: Om! and again he knew about Brahman, knew
about the indestructibility of life, knew about all that is divine, which he
had forgotten.

But this was only a moment, flash. By the foot of the coconut-tree,
Siddhartha collapsed, struck down by tiredness, mumbling Om, placed his
head on the root of the tree and fell into a deep sleep.
Deep was his sleep and without dreams, for a long time he had not
known such a sleep any more. When he woke up after many hours, he felt
as if ten years had passed, he heard the water quietly flowing, did not know
where he was and who had brought him here, opened his eyes, saw with
astonishment that there were trees and the sky above him, and he
remembered where he was and how he got here. But it took him a long
while for this, and the past seemed to him as if it had been covered by a
veil, infinitely distant, infinitely far away, infinitely meaningless. He only
knew that his previous life (in the first moment when he thought about it,
this past life seemed to him like a very old, previous incarnation, like an
early pre-birth of his present self)—that his previous life had been
abandoned by him, that, full of disgust and wretchedness, he had even
intended to throw his life away, but that by a river, under a coconut-tree, he
had come to his senses, the holy word Om on his lips, that then he had
fallen asleep and had now woken up and was looking at the world as a new
man. Quietly, he spoke the word Om to himself, speaking which he had
fallen asleep, and it seemed to him as if his entire long sleep had been
nothing but a long meditative recitation of Om, a thinking of Om, a
submergence and complete entering into Om, into the nameless, the
perfected.
What a wonderful sleep had this been! Never before by sleep, he had
been thus refreshed, thus renewed, thus rejuvenated! Perhaps, he had really
died, had drowned and was reborn in a new body? But no, he knew himself,
he knew his hands and his feet, knew the place where he lay, knew this self
in his chest, this Siddhartha, the eccentric, the weird one, but this
Siddhartha was nevertheless transformed, was renewed, was strangely well
rested, strangely awake, joyful and curious.
Siddhartha straightened up, then he saw a person sitting opposite to him,
an unknown man, a monk in a yellow robe with a shaven head, sitting in the
position of pondering. He observed the man, who had neither hair on his
head nor a beard, and he had not observed him for long when he recognised
this monk as Govinda, the friend of his youth, Govinda who had taken his
refuge with the exalted Buddha. Govinda had aged, he too, but still his face

bore the same features, expressed zeal, faithfulness, searching, timidness.
But when Govinda now, sensing his gaze, opened his eyes and looked at
him, Siddhartha saw that Govinda did not recognise him. Govinda was
happy to find him awake; apparently, he had been sitting here for a long
time and been waiting for him to wake up, though he did not know him.
“I have been sleeping,” said Siddhartha. “However did you get here?”
“You have been sleeping,” answered Govinda. “It is not good to be
sleeping in such places, where snakes often are and the animals of the forest
have their paths. I, oh sir, am a follower of the exalted Gotama, the Buddha,
the Sakyamuni, and have been on a pilgrimage together with several of us
on this path, when I saw you lying and sleeping in a place where it is
dangerous to sleep. Therefore, I sought to wake you up, oh sir, and since I
saw that your sleep was very deep, I stayed behind from my group and sat
with you. And then, so it seems, I have fallen asleep myself, I who wanted
to guard your sleep. Badly, I have served you, tiredness has overwhelmed
me. But now that you’re awake, let me go to catch up with my brothers.”
“I thank you, Samana, for watching out over my sleep,” spoke
Siddhartha. “You’re friendly, you followers of the exalted one. Now you
may go then.”
“I’m going, sir. May you, sir, always be in good health.”
“I thank you, Samana.”
Govinda made the gesture of a salutation and said: “Farewell.”
“Farewell, Govinda,” said Siddhartha.
The monk stopped.
“Permit me to ask, sir, from where do you know my name?”
Now, Siddhartha smiled.
“I know you, oh Govinda, from your father’s hut, and from the school of
the Brahmans, and from the offerings, and from our walk to the Samanas,
and from that hour when you took your refuge with the exalted one in the
grove Jetavana.”
“You’re Siddhartha,” Govinda exclaimed loudly. “Now, I’m recognising
you, and don’t comprehend any more how I couldn’t recognise you right
away. Be welcome, Siddhartha, my joy is great, to see you again.”

“It also gives me joy, to see you again. You’ve been the guard of my
sleep, again I thank you for this, though I wouldn’t have required any guard.
Where are you going to, oh friend?”
“I’m going nowhere. We monks are always travelling, whenever it is not
the rainy season, we always move from one place to another, live according
to the rules of the teachings passed on to us, accept alms, move on. It is
always like this. But you, Siddhartha, where are you going to?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “With me too, friend, it is as it is with you. I’m going
nowhere. I’m just travelling. I’m on a pilgrimage.”
Govinda spoke: “You’re saying: you’re on a pilgrimage, and I believe
you. But, forgive me, oh Siddhartha, you do not look like a pilgrim. You’re
wearing a rich man’s garments, you’re wearing the shoes of a distinguished
gentleman, and your hair, with the fragrance of perfume, is not a pilgrim’s
hair, not the hair of a Samana.”
“Right so, my dear, you have observed well, your keen eyes see
everything. But I haven’t said to you that I was a Samana. I said: I’m on a
pilgrimage. And so it is: I’m on a pilgrimage.”
“You’re on a pilgrimage,” said Govinda. “But few would go on a
pilgrimage in such clothes, few in such shoes, few with such hair. Never I
have met such a pilgrim, being a pilgrim myself for many years.”
“I believe you, my dear Govinda. But now, today, you’ve met a pilgrim
just like this, wearing such shoes, such a garment. Remember, my dear: Not
eternal is the world of appearances, not eternal, anything but eternal are our
garments and the style of our hair, and our hair and bodies themselves. I’m
wearing a rich man’s clothes, you’ve seen this quite right. I’m wearing
them, because I have been a rich man, and I’m wearing my hair like the
worldly and lustful people, for I have been one of them.”
“And now, Siddhartha, what are you now?”
“I don’t know it, I don’t know it just like you. I’m travelling. I was a rich
man and am no rich man any more, and what I’ll be tomorrow, I don’t
know.”
“You’ve lost your riches?”
“I’ve lost them or they me. They somehow happened to slip away from
me. The wheel of physical manifestations is turning quickly, Govinda.
Where is Siddhartha the Brahman? Where is Siddhartha the Samana?

Where is Siddhartha the rich man? Non-eternal things change quickly,
Govinda, you know it.”
Govinda looked at the friend of his youth for a long time, with doubt in
his eyes. After that, he gave him the salutation which one would use on a
gentleman and went on his way.
With a smiling face, Siddhartha watched him leave, he loved him still,
this faithful man, this fearful man. And how could he not have loved
everybody and everything in this moment, in the glorious hour after his
wonderful sleep, filled with Om! The enchantment, which had happened
inside of him in his sleep and by means of the Om, was this very thing that
he loved everything, that he was full of joyful love for everything he saw.
And it was this very thing, so it seemed to him now, which had been his
sickness before, that he was not able to love anybody or anything.
With a smiling face, Siddhartha watched the leaving monk. The sleep had
strengthened him much, but hunger gave him much pain, for by now he had
not eaten for two days, and the times were long past when he had been
tough against hunger. With sadness, and yet also with a smile, he thought of
that time. In those days, so he remembered, he had boasted of three things
to Kamala, had been able to do three noble and undefeatable feats: fasting
—waiting—thinking. These had been his possessions, his power and
strength, his solid staff; in the busy, laborious years of his youth, he had
learned these three feats, nothing else. And now, they had abandoned him,
none of them was his any more, neither fasting, nor waiting, nor thinking.
For the most wretched things, he had given them up, for what fades most
quickly, for sensual lust, for the good life, for riches! His life had indeed
been strange. And now, so it seemed, now he had really become a childlike
person.
Siddhartha thought about his situation. Thinking was hard on him, he did
not really feel like it, but he forced himself.
Now, he thought, since all these most easily perishing things have slipped
from me again, now I’m standing here under the sun again just as I have
been standing here a little child, nothing is mine, I have no abilities, there is
nothing I could bring about, I have learned nothing. How wondrous is this!
Now, that I’m no longer young, that my hair is already half gray, that my
strength is fading, now I’m starting again at the beginning and as a child!
Again, he had to smile. Yes, his fate had been strange! Things were going

downhill with him, and now he was again facing the world void and naked
and stupid. But he could not feel sad about this, no, he even felt a great urge
to laugh, to laugh about himself, to laugh about this strange, foolish world.
“Things are going downhill with you!” he said to himself, and laughed
about it, and as he was saying it, he happened to glance at the river, and he
also saw the river going downhill, always moving on downhill, and singing
and being happy through it all. He liked this well, kindly he smiled at the
river. Was this not the river in which he had intended to drown himself, in
past times, a hundred years ago, or had he dreamed this?
Wondrous indeed was my life, so he thought, wondrous detours it has
taken. As a boy, I had only to do with gods and offerings. As a youth, I had
only to do with asceticism, with thinking and meditation, was searching for
Brahman, worshipped the eternal in the Atman. But as a young man, I
followed the penitents, lived in the forest, suffered of heat and frost, learned
to hunger, taught my body to become dead. Wonderfully, soon afterwards,
insight came towards me in the form of the great Buddha’s teachings, I felt
the knowledge of the oneness of the world circling in me like my own
blood. But I also had to leave Buddha and the great knowledge. I went and
learned the art of love with Kamala, learned trading with Kamaswami, piled
up money, wasted money, learned to love my stomach, learned to please my
senses. I had to spend many years losing my spirit, to unlearn thinking
again, to forget the oneness. Isn’t it just as if I had turned slowly and on a
long detour from a man into a child, from a thinker into a childlike person?
And yet, this path has been very good; and yet, the bird in my chest has not
died. But what a path has this been! I had to pass through so much stupidity,
through so much vice, through so many errors, through so much disgust and
disappointments and woe, just to become a child again and to be able to
start over. But it was right so, my heart says “Yes” to it, my eyes smile to it.
I’ve had to experience despair, I’ve had to sink down to the most foolish
one of all thoughts, to the thought of suicide, in order to be able to
experience divine grace, to hear Om again, to be able to sleep properly and
awake properly again. I had to become a fool, to find Atman in me again. I
had to sin, to be able to live again. Where else might my path lead me to? It
is foolish, this path, it moves in loops, perhaps it is going around in a circle.
Let it go as it likes, I want to take it.
Wonderfully, he felt joy rolling like waves in his chest.

Wherever from, he asked his heart, where from did you get this
happiness? Might it come from that long, good sleep, which has done me so
good? Or from the word Om, which I said? Or from the fact that I have
escaped, that I have completely fled, that I am finally free again and am
standing like a child under the sky? Oh how good is it to have fled, to have
become free! How clean and beautiful is the air here, how good to breathe!
There, where I ran away from, there everything smelled of ointments, of
spices, of wine, of excess, of sloth. How I hated this world of the rich, of
those who revel in fine food, of the gamblers! How I hated myself for
staying in this terrible world for so long! How I hated myself, have
deprived, poisoned, tortured myself, have made myself old and evil! No,
never again I will, as I used to like doing so much, delude myself into
thinking that Siddhartha was wise! But this one thing I have done well, this
I like, this I must praise, that there is now an end to that hatred against
myself, to that foolish and dreary life! I praise you, Siddhartha, after so
many years of foolishness, you have once again had an idea, have done
something, have heard the bird in your chest singing and have followed it!
Thus he praised himself, found joy in himself, listened curiously to his
stomach, which was rumbling with hunger. He had now, so he felt, in these
recent times and days, completely tasted and spit out, devoured up to the
point of desperation and death, a piece of suffering, a piece of misery. Like
this, it was good. For much longer, he could have stayed with Kamaswami,
made money, wasted money, filled his stomach, and let his soul die of thirst;
for much longer he could have lived in this soft, well upholstered hell, if
this had not happened: the moment of complete hopelessness and despair,
that most extreme moment, when he hung over the rushing waters and was
ready to destroy himself. That he had felt this despair, this deep disgust, and
that he had not succumbed to it, that the bird, the joyful source and voice in
him was still alive after all, this was why he felt joy, this was why he
laughed, this was why his face was smiling brightly under his hair which
had turned gray.
“It is good,” he thought, “to get a taste of everything for oneself, which
one needs to know. That lust for the world and riches do not belong to the
good things, I have already learned as a child. I have known it for a long
time, but I have experienced only now. And now I know it, don’t just know
it in my memory, but in my eyes, in my heart, in my stomach. Good for me,
to know this!”

For a long time, he pondered his transformation, listened to the bird, as it
sang for joy. Had not this bird died in him, had he not felt its death? No,
something else from within him had died, something which already for a
long time had yearned to die. Was it not this what he used to intend to kill in
his ardent years as a penitent? Was this not his self, his small, frightened,
and proud self, he had wrestled with for so many years, which had defeated
him again and again, which was back again after every killing, prohibited
joy, felt fear? Was it not this, which today had finally come to its death, here
in the forest, by this lovely river? Was it not due to this death, that he was
now like a child, so full of trust, so without fear, so full of joy?
Now Siddhartha also got some idea of why he had fought this self in vain
as a Brahman, as a penitent. Too much knowledge had held him back, too
many holy verses, too many sacrificial rules, to much self-castigation, so
much doing and striving for that goal! Full of arrogance, he had been,
always the smartest, always working the most, always one step ahead of all
others, always the knowing and spiritual one, always the priest or wise one.
Into being a priest, into this arrogance, into this spirituality, his self had
retreated, there it sat firmly and grew, while he thought he would kill it by
fasting and penance. Now he saw it and saw that the secret voice had been
right, that no teacher would ever have been able to bring about his
salvation. Therefore, he had to go out into the world, lose himself to lust
and power, to woman and money, had to become a merchant, a dicegambler, a drinker, and a greedy person, until the priest and Samana in him
was dead. Therefore, he had to continue bearing these ugly years, bearing
the disgust, the teachings, the pointlessness of a dreary and wasted life up to
the end, up to bitter despair, until Siddhartha the lustful, Siddhartha the
greedy could also die. He had died, a new Siddhartha had woken up from
the sleep. He would also grow old, he would also eventually have to die,
mortal was Siddhartha, mortal was every physical form. But today he was
young, was a child, the new Siddhartha, and was full of joy.
He thought these thoughts, listened with a smile to his stomach, listened
gratefully to a buzzing bee. Cheerfully, he looked into the rushing river,
never before he had liked a water so well as this one, never before he had
perceived the voice and the parable of the moving water thus strongly and
beautifully. It seemed to him, as if the river had something special to tell
him, something he did not know yet, which was still awaiting him. In this
river, Siddhartha had intended to drown himself, in it the old, tired,

desperate Siddhartha had drowned today. But the new Siddhartha felt a
deep love for this rushing water, and decided for himself, not to leave it
very soon.

THE FERRYMAN
By this river I want to stay, thought Siddhartha, it is the same which I
have crossed a long time ago on my way to the childlike people, a friendly
ferryman had guided me then, he is the one I want to go to, starting out
from his hut, my path had led me at that time into a new life, which had
now grown old and is dead—my present path, my present new life, shall
also take its start there!
Tenderly, he looked into the rushing water, into the transparent green,
into the crystal lines of its drawing, so rich in secrets. Bright pearls he saw
rising from the deep, quiet bubbles of air floating on the reflecting surface,
the blue of the sky being depicted in it. With a thousand eyes, the river
looked at him, with green ones, with white ones, with crystal ones, with
sky-blue ones. How did he love this water, how did it delight him, how
grateful was he to it! In his heart he heard the voice talking, which was
newly awaking, and it told him: Love this water! Stay near it! Learn from
it! Oh yes, he wanted to learn from it, he wanted to listen to it. He who
would understand this water and its secrets, so it seemed to him, would also
understand many other things, many secrets, all secrets.
But out of all secrets of the river, he today only saw one, this one touched
his soul. He saw: this water ran and ran, incessantly it ran, and was
nevertheless always there, was always at all times the same and yet new in
every moment! Great be he who would grasp this, understand this! He
understood and grasped it not, only felt some idea of it stirring, a distant
memory, divine voices.
Siddhartha rose, the workings of hunger in his body became unbearable.
In a daze he walked on, up the path by the bank, upriver, listened to the
current, listened to the rumbling hunger in his body.
When he reached the ferry, the boat was just ready, and the same
ferryman who had once transported the young Samana across the river,

stood in the boat, Siddhartha recognised him, he had also aged very much.
“Would you like to ferry me over?” he asked.
The ferryman, being astonished to see such an elegant man walking
along and on foot, took him into his boat and pushed it off the bank.
“It’s a beautiful life you have chosen for yourself,” the passenger spoke.
“It must be beautiful to live by this water every day and to cruise on it.”
With a smile, the man at the oar moved from side to side: “It is beautiful,
sir, it is as you say. But isn’t every life, isn’t every work beautiful?”
“This may be true. But I envy you for yours.”
“Ah, you would soon stop enjoying it. This is nothing for people wearing
fine clothes.”
Siddhartha laughed. “Once before, I have been looked upon today
because of my clothes, I have been looked upon with distrust. Wouldn’t
you, ferryman, like to accept these clothes, which are a nuisance to me,
from me? For you must know, I have no money to pay your fare.”
“You’re joking, sir,” the ferryman laughed.
“I’m not joking, friend. Behold, once before you have ferried me across
this water in your boat for the immaterial reward of a good deed. Thus, do it
today as well, and accept my clothes for it.”
“And do you, sir, intent to continue travelling without clothes?”
“Ah, most of all I wouldn’t want to continue travelling at all. Most of all
I would rather you, ferryman, gave me an old loincloth and kept me with
you as your assistant, or rather as your trainee, for I’ll have to learn first
how to handle the boat.”
For a long time, the ferryman looked at the stranger, searching.
“Now I recognise you,” he finally said. “At one time, you’ve slept in my
hut, this was a long time ago, possibly more than twenty years ago, and
you’ve been ferried across the river by me, and we parted like good friends.
Haven’t you been a Samana? I can’t think of your name any more.”
“My name is Siddhartha, and I was a Samana, when you’ve last seen
me.”
“So be welcome, Siddhartha. My name is Vasudeva. You will, so I hope,
be my guest today as well and sleep in my hut, and tell me, where you’re
coming from and why these beautiful clothes are such a nuisance to you.”

They had reached the middle of the river, and Vasudeva pushed the oar
with more strength, in order to overcome the current. He worked calmly, his
eyes fixed in on the front of the boat, with brawny arms. Siddhartha sat and
watched him, and remembered, how once before, on that last day of his
time as a Samana, love for this man had stirred in his heart. Gratefully, he
accepted Vasudeva’s invitation. When they had reached the bank, he helped
him to tie the boat to the stakes; after this, the ferryman asked him to enter
the hut, offered him bread and water, and Siddhartha ate with eager
pleasure, and also ate with eager pleasure of the mango fruits Vasudeva
offered him.
Afterwards, it was almost the time of the sunset, they sat on a log by the
bank, and Siddhartha told the ferryman about where he originally came
from and about his life, as he had seen it before his eyes today, in that hour
of despair. Until late at night, lasted his tale.
Vasudeva listened with great attention. Listening carefully, he let
everything enter his mind, birthplace and childhood, all that learning, all
that searching, all joy, all distress. This was among the ferryman’s virtues
one of the greatest: like only a few, he knew how to listen. Without him
having spoken a word, the speaker sensed how Vasudeva let his words enter
his mind, quiet, open, waiting, how he did not lose a single one, awaited not
a single one with impatience, did not add his praise or rebuke, was just
listening. Siddhartha felt, what a happy fortune it is, to confess to such a
listener, to bury in his heart his own life, his own search, his own suffering.
But in the end of Siddhartha’s tale, when he spoke of the tree by the river,
and of his deep fall, of the holy Om, and how he had felt such a love for the
river after his slumber, the ferryman listened with twice the attention,
entirely and completely absorbed by it, with his eyes closed.
But when Siddhartha fell silent, and a long silence had occurred, then
Vasudeva said: “It is as I thought. The river has spoken to you. It is your
friend as well, it speaks to you as well. That is good, that is very good. Stay
with me, Siddhartha, my friend. I used to have a wife, her bed was next to
mine, but she has died a long time ago, for a long time, I have lived alone.
Now, you shall live with me, there is space and food for both.”
“I thank you,” said Siddhartha, “I thank you and accept. And I also thank
you for this, Vasudeva, for listening to me so well! These people are rare

who know how to listen. And I did not meet a single one who knew it as
well as you did. I will also learn in this respect from you.”
“You will learn it,” spoke Vasudeva, “but not from me. The river has
taught me to listen, from it you will learn it as well. It knows everything,
the river, everything can be learned from it. See, you’ve already learned this
from the water too, that it is good to strive downwards, to sink, to seek
depth. The rich and elegant Siddhartha is becoming an oarsman’s servant,
the learned Brahman Siddhartha becomes a ferryman: this has also been
told to you by the river. You’ll learn that other thing from it as well.”
Quoth Siddhartha after a long pause: “What other thing, Vasudeva?”
Vasudeva rose. “It is late,” he said, “let’s go to sleep. I can’t tell you that
other thing, oh friend. You’ll learn it, or perhaps you know it already. See,
I’m no learned man, I have no special skill in speaking, I also have no
special skill in thinking. All I’m able to do is to listen and to be godly, I
have learned nothing else. If I was able to say and teach it, I might be a wise
man, but like this I am only a ferryman, and it is my task to ferry people
across the river. I have transported many, thousands; and to all of them, my
river has been nothing but an obstacle on their travels. They travelled to
seek money and business, and for weddings, and on pilgrimages, and the
river was obstructing their path, and the ferryman’s job was to get them
quickly across that obstacle. But for some among thousands, a few, four or
five, the river has stopped being an obstacle, they have heard its voice, they
have listened to it, and the river has become sacred to them, as it has
become sacred to me. Let’s rest now, Siddhartha.”
Siddhartha stayed with the ferryman and learned to operate the boat, and
when there was nothing to do at the ferry, he worked with Vasudeva in the
rice-field, gathered wood, plucked the fruit off the banana-trees. He learned
to build an oar, and learned to mend the boat, and to weave baskets, and
was joyful because of everything he learned, and the days and months
passed quickly. But more than Vasudeva could teach him, he was taught by
the river. Incessantly, he learned from it. Most of all, he learned from it to
listen, to pay close attention with a quiet heart, with a waiting, opened soul,
without passion, without a wish, without judgement, without an opinion.
In a friendly manner, he lived side by side with Vasudeva, and
occasionally they exchanged some words, few and at length thought about

words. Vasudeva was no friend of words; rarely, Siddhartha succeeded in
persuading him to speak.
“Did you,” so he asked him at one time, “did you too learn that secret
from the river: that there is no time?”
Vasudeva’s face was filled with a bright smile.
“Yes, Siddhartha,” he spoke. “It is this what you mean, isn’t it: that the
river is everywhere at once, at the source and at the mouth, at the waterfall,
at the ferry, at the rapids, in the sea, in the mountains, everywhere at once,
and that there is only the present time for it, not the shadow of the past, not
the shadow of the future?”
“This it is,” said Siddhartha. “And when I had learned it, I looked at my
life, and it was also a river, and the boy Siddhartha was only separated from
the man Siddhartha and from the old man Siddhartha by a shadow, not by
something real. Also, Siddhartha’s previous births were no past, and his
death and his return to Brahma was no future. Nothing was, nothing will be;
everything is, everything has existence and is present.”
Siddhartha spoke with ecstasy; deeply, this enlightenment had delighted
him. Oh, was not all suffering time, were not all forms of tormenting
oneself and being afraid time, was not everything hard, everything hostile in
the world gone and overcome as soon as one had overcome time, as soon as
time would have been put out of existence by one’s thoughts? In ecstatic
delight, he had spoken, but Vasudeva smiled at him brightly and nodded in
confirmation; silently he nodded, brushed his hand over Siddhartha’s
shoulder, turned back to his work.
And once again, when the river had just increased its flow in the rainy
season and made a powerful noise, then said Siddhartha: “Isn’t it so, oh
friend, the river has many voices, very many voices? Hasn’t it the voice of a
king, and of a warrior, and of a bull, and of a bird of the night, and of a
woman giving birth, and of a sighing man, and a thousand other voices
more?”
“So it is,” Vasudeva nodded, “all voices of the creatures are in its voice.”
“And do you know,” Siddhartha continued, “what word it speaks, when
you succeed in hearing all of its ten thousand voices at once?”
Happily, Vasudeva’s face was smiling, he bent over to Siddhartha and
spoke the holy Om into his ear. And this had been the very thing which

Siddhartha had also been hearing.
And time after time, his smile became more similar to the ferryman’s,
became almost just as bright, almost just as thoroughly glowing with bliss,
just as shining out of thousand small wrinkles, just as alike to a child’s, just
as alike to an old man’s. Many travellers, seeing the two ferrymen, thought
they were brothers. Often, they sat in the evening together by the bank on
the log, said nothing and both listened to the water, which was no water to
them, but the voice of life, the voice of what exists, of what is eternally
taking shape. And it happened from time to time that both, when listening
to the river, thought of the same things, of a conversation from the day
before yesterday, of one of their travellers, the face and fate of whom had
occupied their thoughts, of death, of their childhood, and that they both in
the same moment, when the river had been saying something good to them,
looked at each other, both thinking precisely the same thing, both delighted
about the same answer to the same question.
There was something about this ferry and the two ferrymen which was
transmitted to others, which many of the travellers felt. It happened
occasionally that a traveller, after having looked at the face of one of the
ferrymen, started to tell the story of his life, told about pains, confessed evil
things, asked for comfort and advice. It happened occasionally that
someone asked for permission to stay for a night with them to listen to the
river. It also happened that curious people came, who had been told that
there were two wise men, or sorcerers, or holy men living by that ferry. The
curious people asked many questions, but they got no answers, and they
found neither sorcerers nor wise men, they only found two friendly little old
men, who seemed to be mute and to have become a bit strange and gaga.
And the curious people laughed and were discussing how foolishly and
gullibly the common people were spreading such empty rumours.
The years passed by, and nobody counted them. Then, at one time,
monks came by on a pilgrimage, followers of Gotama, the Buddha, who
were asking to be ferried across the river, and by them the ferrymen were
told that they were most hurriedly walking back to their great teacher, for
the news had spread the exalted one was deadly sick and would soon die his
last human death, in order to become one with the salvation. It was not
long, until a new flock of monks came along on their pilgrimage, and
another one, and the monks as well as most of the other travellers and

people walking through the land spoke of nothing else than of Gotama and
his impending death. And as people are flocking from everywhere and from
all sides, when they are going to war or to the coronation of a king, and are
gathering like ants in droves, thus they flocked, like being drawn on by a
magic spell, to where the great Buddha was awaiting his death, where the
huge event was to take place and the great perfected one of an era was to
become one with the glory.
Often, Siddhartha thought in those days of the dying wise man, the great
teacher, whose voice had admonished nations and had awoken hundreds of
thousands, whose voice he had also once heard, whose holy face he had
also once seen with respect. Kindly, he thought of him, saw his path to
perfection before his eyes, and remembered with a smile those words which
he had once, as a young man, said to him, the exalted one. They had been,
so it seemed to him, proud and precocious words; with a smile, he
remembered them. For a long time he knew that there was nothing standing
between Gotama and him any more, though he was still unable to accept his
teachings. No, there was no teaching a truly searching person, someone
who truly wanted to find, could accept. But he who had found, he could
approve of any teachings, every path, every goal, there was nothing
standing between him and all the other thousand any more who lived in that
what is eternal, who breathed what is divine.
On one of these days, when so many went on a pilgrimage to the dying
Buddha, Kamala also went to him, who used to be the most beautiful of the
courtesans. A long time ago, she had retired from her previous life, had
given her garden to the monks of Gotama as a gift, had taken her refuge in
the teachings, was among the friends and benefactors of the pilgrims.
Together with Siddhartha the boy, her son, she had gone on her way due to
the news of the near death of Gotama, in simple clothes, on foot. With her
little son, she was travelling by the river; but the boy had soon grown tired,
desired to go back home, desired to rest, desired to eat, became disobedient
and started whining.
Kamala often had to take a rest with him, he was accustomed to having
his way against her, she had to feed him, had to comfort him, had to scold
him. He did not comprehend why he had to go on this exhausting and sad
pilgrimage with his mother, to an unknown place, to a stranger, who was
holy and about to die. So what if he died, how did this concern the boy?

The pilgrims were getting close to Vasudeva’s ferry, when little
Siddhartha once again forced his mother to rest. She, Kamala herself, had
also become tired, and while the boy was chewing a banana, she crouched
down on the ground, closed her eyes a bit, and rested. But suddenly, she
uttered a wailing scream, the boy looked at her in fear and saw her face
having grown pale from horror; and from under her dress, a small, black
snake fled, by which Kamala had been bitten.
Hurriedly, they now both ran along the path, in order to reach people, and
got near to the ferry, there Kamala collapsed, and was not able to go any
further. But the boy started crying miserably, only interrupting it to kiss and
hug his mother, and she also joined his loud screams for help, until the
sound reached Vasudeva’s ears, who stood at the ferry. Quickly, he came
walking, took the woman on his arms, carried her into the boat, the boy ran
along, and soon they all reached the hut, where Siddhartha stood by the
stove and was just lighting the fire. He looked up and first saw the boy’s
face, which wondrously reminded him of something, like a warning to
remember something he had forgotten. Then he saw Kamala, whom he
instantly recognised, though she lay unconscious in the ferryman’s arms,
and now he knew that it was his own son, whose face had been such a
warning reminder to him, and the heart stirred in his chest.
Kamala’s wound was washed, but had already turned black and her body
was swollen, she was made to drink a healing potion. Her consciousness
returned, she lay on Siddhartha’s bed in the hut and bent over her stood
Siddhartha, who used to love her so much. It seemed like a dream to her;
with a smile, she looked at her friend’s face; just slowly she, realized her
situation, remembered the bite, called timidly for the boy.
“He’s with you, don’t worry,” said Siddhartha.
Kamala looked into his eyes. She spoke with a heavy tongue, paralysed
by the poison. “You’ve become old, my dear,” she said, “you’ve become
gray. But you are like the young Samana, who at one time came without
clothes, with dusty feet, to me into the garden. You are much more like him
than you were like him at that time when you had left me and Kamaswami.
In the eyes, you’re like him, Siddhartha. Alas, I have also grown old, old—
could you still recognise me?”
Siddhartha smiled: “Instantly, I recognised you, Kamala, my dear.”

Kamala pointed to her boy and said: “Did you recognise him as well? He
is your son.”
Her eyes became confused and fell shut. The boy wept, Siddhartha took
him on his knees, let him weep, petted his hair, and at the sight of the
child’s face, a Brahman prayer came to his mind, which he had learned a
long time ago, when he had been a little boy himself. Slowly, with a singing
voice, he started to speak; from his past and childhood, the words came
flowing to him. And with that singsong, the boy became calm, was only
now and then uttering a sob and fell asleep. Siddhartha placed him on
Vasudeva’s bed. Vasudeva stood by the stove and cooked rice. Siddhartha
gave him a look, which he returned with a smile.
“She’ll die,” Siddhartha said quietly.
Vasudeva nodded; over his friendly face ran the light of the stove’s fire.
Once again, Kamala returned to consciousness. Pain distorted her face,
Siddhartha’s eyes read the suffering on her mouth, on her pale cheeks.
Quietly, he read it, attentively, waiting, his mind becoming one with her
suffering. Kamala felt it, her gaze sought his eyes.
Looking at him, she said: “Now I see that your eyes have changed as
well. They’ve become completely different. By what do I still recognise
that you’re Siddhartha? It’s you, and it’s not you.”
Siddhartha said nothing, quietly his eyes looked at hers.
“You have achieved it?” she asked. “You have found peace?”
He smiled and placed his hand on hers.
“I’m seeing it,” she said, “I’m seeing it. I too will find peace.”
“You have found it,” Siddhartha spoke in a whisper.
Kamala never stopped looking into his eyes. She thought about her
pilgrimage to Gotama, which she wanted to take, in order to see the face of
the perfected one, to breathe his peace, and she thought that she had now
found him in his place, and that it was good, just as good, as if she had seen
the other one. She wanted to tell this to him, but the tongue no longer
obeyed her will. Without speaking, she looked at him, and he saw the life
fading from her eyes. When the final pain filled her eyes and made them
grow dim, when the final shiver ran through her limbs, his finger closed her
eyelids.

For a long time, he sat and looked at her peacefully dead face. For a long
time, he observed her mouth, her old, tired mouth, with those lips, which
had become thin, and he remembered, that he used to, in the spring of his
years, compare this mouth with a freshly cracked fig. For a long time, he
sat, read in the pale face, in the tired wrinkles, filled himself with this sight,
saw his own face lying in the same manner, just as white, just as quenched
out, and saw at the same time his face and hers being young, with red lips,
with fiery eyes, and the feeling of this both being present and at the same
time real, the feeling of eternity, completely filled every aspect of his being.
Deeply he felt, more deeply than ever before, in this hour, the
indestructibility of every life, the eternity of every moment.
When he rose, Vasudeva had prepared rice for him. But Siddhartha did
not eat. In the stable, where their goat stood, the two old men prepared beds
of straw for themselves, and Vasudeva lay himself down to sleep. But
Siddhartha went outside and sat this night before the hut, listening to the
river, surrounded by the past, touched and encircled by all times of his life
at the same time. But occasionally, he rose, stepped to the door of the hut
and listened, whether the boy was sleeping.
Early in the morning, even before the sun could be seen, Vasudeva came
out of the stable and walked over to his friend.
“You haven’t slept,” he said.
“No, Vasudeva. I sat here, I was listening to the river. A lot it has told me,
deeply it has filled me with the healing thought, with the thought of
oneness.”
“You’ve experienced suffering, Siddhartha, but I see: no sadness has
entered your heart.”
“No, my dear, how should I be sad? I, who have been rich and happy,
have become even richer and happier now. My son has been given to me.”
“Your son shall be welcome to me as well. But now, Siddhartha, let’s get
to work, there is much to be done. Kamala has died on the same bed on
which my wife had died a long time ago. Let us also build Kamala’s funeral
pile on the same hill on which I had then built my wife’s funeral pile.”
While the boy was still asleep, they built the funeral pile.

THE SON
Timid and weeping, the boy had attended his mother’s funeral; gloomy
and shy, he had listened to Siddhartha, who greeted him as his son and
welcomed him at his place in Vasudeva’s hut. Pale, he sat for many days by
the hill of the dead, did not want to eat, gave no open look, did not open his
heart, met his fate with resistance and denial.
Siddhartha spared him and let him do as he pleased, he honoured his
mourning. Siddhartha understood that his son did not know him, that he
could not love him like a father. Slowly, he also saw and understood that the
eleven-year-old was a pampered boy, a mother’s boy, and that he had grown
up in the habits of rich people, accustomed to finer food, to a soft bed,
accustomed to giving orders to servants. Siddhartha understood that the
mourning, pampered child could not suddenly and willingly be content with
a life among strangers and in poverty. He did not force him, he did many a
chore for him, always picked the best piece of the meal for him. Slowly, he
hoped to win him over, by friendly patience.
Rich and happy, he had called himself, when the boy had come to him.
Since time had passed on in the meantime, and the boy remained a stranger
and in a gloomy disposition, since he displayed a proud and stubbornly
disobedient heart, did not want to do any work, did not pay his respect to
the old men, stole from Vasudeva’s fruit-trees, then Siddhartha began to
understand that his son had not brought him happiness and peace, but
suffering and worry. But he loved him, and he preferred the suffering and
worries of love over happiness and joy without the boy. Since young
Siddhartha was in the hut, the old men had split the work. Vasudeva had
again taken on the job of the ferryman all by himself, and Siddhartha, in
order to be with his son, did the work in the hut and the field.
For a long time, for long months, Siddhartha waited for his son to
understand him, to accept his love, to perhaps reciprocate it. For long
months, Vasudeva waited, watching, waited and said nothing. One day,

when Siddhartha the younger had once again tormented his father very
much with spite and an unsteadiness in his wishes and had broken both of
his rice-bowls, Vasudeva took in the evening his friend aside and talked to
him.
“Pardon me,” he said, “from a friendly heart, I’m talking to you. I’m
seeing that you are tormenting yourself, I’m seeing that you’re in grief.
Your son, my dear, is worrying you, and he is also worrying me. That young
bird is accustomed to a different life, to a different nest. He has not, like
you, run away from riches and the city, being disgusted and fed up with it;
against his will, he had to leave all this behind. I asked the river, oh friend,
many times I have asked it. But the river laughs, it laughs at me, it laughs at
you and me, and is shaking with laughter at our foolishness. Water wants to
join water, youth wants to join youth, your son is not in the place where he
can prosper. You too should ask the river; you too should listen to it!”
Troubled, Siddhartha looked into his friendly face, in the many wrinkles
of which there was incessant cheerfulness.
“How could I part with him?” he said quietly, ashamed. “Give me some
more time, my dear! See, I’m fighting for him, I’m seeking to win his heart,
with love and with friendly patience I intend to capture it. One day, the river
shall also talk to him, he also is called upon.”
Vasudeva’s smile flourished more warmly. “Oh yes, he too is called
upon, he too is of the eternal life. But do we, you and me, know what he is
called upon to do, what path to take, what actions to perform, what pain to
endure? Not a small one, his pain will be; after all, his heart is proud and
hard, people like this have to suffer a lot, err a lot, do much injustice,
burden themselves with much sin. Tell me, my dear: you’re not taking
control of your son’s upbringing? You don’t force him? You don’t beat him?
You don’t punish him?”
“No, Vasudeva, I don’t do anything of this.”
“I knew it. You don’t force him, don’t beat him, don’t give him orders,
because you know that ‘soft’ is stronger than ‘hard’, water stronger than
rocks, love stronger than force. Very good, I praise you. But aren’t you
mistaken in thinking that you wouldn’t force him, wouldn’t punish him?
Don’t you shackle him with your love? Don’t you make him feel inferior
every day, and don’t you make it even harder on him with your kindness
and patience? Don’t you force him, the arrogant and pampered boy, to live

in a hut with two old banana-eaters, to whom even rice is a delicacy, whose
thoughts can’t be his, whose hearts are old and quiet and beat in a different
pace than his? Isn’t he forced, isn’t he punished by all this?”
Troubled, Siddhartha looked to the ground. Quietly, he asked: “What do
you think should I do?”
Quoth Vasudeva: “Bring him into the city, bring him into his mother’s
house, there’ll still be servants around, give him to them. And when there
aren’t any around any more, bring him to a teacher, not for the teachings’
sake, but so that he shall be among other boys, and among girls, and in the
world which is his own. Have you never thought of this?”
“You’re seeing into my heart,” Siddhartha spoke sadly. “Often, I have
thought of this. But look, how shall I put him, who had no tender heart
anyhow, into this world? Won’t he become exuberant, won’t he lose himself
to pleasure and power, won’t he repeat all of his father’s mistakes, won’t he
perhaps get entirely lost in Sansara?”
Brightly, the ferryman’s smile lit up; softly, he touched Siddhartha’s arm
and said: “Ask the river about it, my friend! Hear it laugh about it! Would
you actually believe that you had committed your foolish acts in order to
spare your son from committing them too? And could you in any way
protect your son from Sansara? How could you? By means of teachings,
prayer, admonition? My dear, have you entirely forgotten that story, that
story containing so many lessons, that story about Siddhartha, a Brahman’s
son, which you once told me here on this very spot? Who has kept the
Samana Siddhartha safe from Sansara, from sin, from greed, from
foolishness? Were his father’s religious devotion, his teacher’s warnings,
his own knowledge, his own search able to keep him safe? Which father,
which teacher had been able to protect him from living his life for himself,
from soiling himself with life, from burdening himself with guilt, from
drinking the bitter drink for himself, from finding his path for himself?
Would you think, my dear, anybody might perhaps be spared from taking
this path? That perhaps your little son would be spared, because you love
him, because you would like to keep him from suffering and pain and
disappointment? But even if you would die ten times for him, you would
not be able to take the slightest part of his destiny upon yourself.”
Never before, Vasudeva had spoken so many words. Kindly, Siddhartha
thanked him, went troubled into the hut, could not sleep for a long time.

Vasudeva had told him nothing he had not already thought and known for
himself. But this was a knowledge he could not act upon, stronger than the
knowledge was his love for the boy, stronger was his tenderness, his fear to
lose him. Had he ever lost his heart so much to something, had he ever
loved any person thus, thus blindly, thus sufferingly, thus unsuccessfully,
and yet thus happily?
Siddhartha could not heed his friend’s advice, he could not give up the
boy. He let the boy give him orders, he let him disregard him. He said
nothing and waited; daily, he began the mute struggle of friendliness, the
silent war of patience. Vasudeva also said nothing and waited, friendly,
knowing, patient. They were both masters of patience.
At one time, when the boy’s face reminded him very much of Kamala,
Siddhartha suddenly had to think of a line which Kamala a long time ago, in
the days of their youth, had once said to him. “You cannot love,” she had
said to him, and he had agreed with her and had compared himself with a
star, while comparing the childlike people with falling leaves, and
nevertheless he had also sensed an accusation in that line. Indeed, he had
never been able to lose or devote himself completely to another person, to
forget himself, to commit foolish acts for the love of another person; never
he had been able to do this, and this was, as it had seemed to him at that
time, the great distinction which set him apart from the childlike people.
But now, since his son was here, now he, Siddhartha, had also become
completely a childlike person, suffering for the sake of another person,
loving another person, lost to a love, having become a fool on account of
love. Now he too felt, late, once in his lifetime, this strongest and strangest
of all passions, suffered from it, suffered miserably, and was nevertheless in
bliss, was nevertheless renewed in one respect, enriched by one thing.
He did sense very well that this love, this blind love for his son, was a
passion, something very human, that it was Sansara, a murky source, dark
waters. Nevertheless, he felt at the same time, it was not worthless, it was
necessary, came from the essence of his own being. This pleasure also had
to be atoned for, this pain also had to be endured, these foolish acts also had
to be committed.
Through all this, the son let him commit his foolish acts, let him court for
his affection, let him humiliate himself every day by giving in to his moods.
This father had nothing which would have delighted him and nothing which

he would have feared. He was a good man, this father, a good, kind, soft
man, perhaps a very devout man, perhaps a saint, all these were no
attributes which could win the boy over. He was bored by this father, who
kept him prisoner here in this miserable hut of his, he was bored by him,
and for him to answer every naughtiness with a smile, every insult with
friendliness, every viciousness with kindness, this very thing was the hated
trick of this old sneak. Much more the boy would have liked it if he had
been threatened by him, if he had been abused by him.
A day came when what young Siddhartha had on his mind came bursting
forth, and he openly turned against his father. The latter had given him a
task, he had told him to gather brushwood. But the boy did not leave the
hut, in stubborn disobedience and rage he stayed where he was, thumped on
the ground with his feet, clenched his fists, and screamed in a powerful
outburst his hatred and contempt into his father’s face.
“Get the brushwood for yourself!” he shouted, foaming at the mouth,
“I’m not your servant. I do know that you won’t hit me, you don’t dare; I do
know that you constantly want to punish me and put me down with your
religious devotion and your indulgence. You want me to become like you,
just as devout, just as soft, just as wise! But I, listen up, just to make you
suffer, I rather want to become a highway-robber and murderer, and go to
hell, than to become like you! I hate you, you’re not my father, and if
you’ve ten times been my mother’s fornicator!”
Rage and grief boiled over in him, foamed at the father in a hundred
savage and evil words. Then the boy ran away and only returned late at
night.
But the next morning, he had disappeared. What had also disappeared
was a small basket, woven out of bast of two colours, in which the ferrymen
kept those copper and silver coins which they received as a fare. The boat
had also disappeared, Siddhartha saw it lying by the opposite bank. The boy
had run away.
“I must follow him,” said Siddhartha, who had been shivering with grief
since those ranting speeches the boy had made yesterday. “A child can’t go
through the forest all alone. He’ll perish. We must build a raft, Vasudeva, to
get over the water.”
“We will build a raft,” said Vasudeva, “to get our boat back, which the
boy has taken away. But him, you shall let run along, my friend, he is no

child any more, he knows how to get around. He’s looking for the path to
the city, and he is right, don’t forget that. He’s doing what you’ve failed to
do yourself. He’s taking care of himself, he’s taking his course. Alas,
Siddhartha, I see you suffering, but you’re suffering a pain at which one
would like to laugh, at which you’ll soon laugh for yourself.”
Siddhartha did not answer. He already held the axe in his hands and
began to make a raft of bamboo, and Vasudeva helped him to tie the canes
together with ropes of grass. Then they crossed over, drifted far off their
course, pulled the raft upriver on the opposite bank.
“Why did you take the axe along?” asked Siddhartha.
Vasudeva said: “It might have been possible that the oar of our boat got
lost.”
But Siddhartha knew what his friend was thinking. He thought, the boy
would have thrown away or broken the oar in order to get even and in order
to keep them from following him. And in fact, there was no oar left in the
boat. Vasudeva pointed to the bottom of the boat and looked at his friend
with a smile, as if he wanted to say: “Don’t you see what your son is trying
to tell you? Don’t you see that he doesn’t want to be followed?” But he did
not say this in words. He started making a new oar. But Siddhartha bid his
farewell, to look for the run-away. Vasudeva did not stop him.
When Siddhartha had already been walking through the forest for a long
time, the thought occurred to him that his search was useless. Either, so he
thought, the boy was far ahead and had already reached the city, or, if he
should still be on his way, he would conceal himself from him, the pursuer.
As he continued thinking, he also found that he, on his part, was not
worried for his son, that he knew deep inside that he had neither perished
nor was in any danger in the forest. Nevertheless, he ran without stopping,
no longer to save him, just to satisfy his desire, just to perhaps see him one
more time. And he ran up to just outside of the city.
When, near the city, he reached a wide road, he stopped, by the entrance
of the beautiful pleasure-garden, which used to belong to Kamala, where he
had seen her for the first time in her sedan-chair. The past rose up in his
soul, again he saw himself standing there, young, a bearded, naked Samana,
the hair full of dust. For a long time, Siddhartha stood there and looked
through the open gate into the garden, seeing monks in yellow robes
walking among the beautiful trees.

For a long time, he stood there, pondering, seeing images, listening to the
story of his life. For a long time, he stood there, looked at the monks, saw
young Siddhartha in their place, saw young Kamala walking among the
high trees. Clearly, he saw himself being served food and drink by Kamala,
receiving his first kiss from her, looking proudly and disdainfully back on
his Brahmanism, beginning proudly and full of desire his worldly life. He
saw Kamaswami, saw the servants, the orgies, the gamblers with the dice,
the musicians, saw Kamala’s song-bird in the cage, lived through all this
once again, breathed Sansara, was once again old and tired, felt once again
disgust, felt once again the wish to annihilate himself, was once again
healed by the holy Om.
After having been standing by the gate of the garden for a long time,
Siddhartha realised that his desire was foolish, which had made him go up
to this place, that he could not help his son, that he was not allowed to cling
to him. Deeply, he felt the love for the run-away in his heart, like a wound,
and he felt at the same time that this wound had not been given to him in
order to turn the knife in it, that it had to become a blossom and had to
shine.
That this wound did not blossom yet, did not shine yet, at this hour, made
him sad. Instead of the desired goal, which had drawn him here following
the run-away son, there was now emptiness. Sadly, he sat down, felt
something dying in his heart, experienced emptiness, saw no joy any more,
no goal. He sat lost in thought and waited. This he had learned by the river,
this one thing: waiting, having patience, listening attentively. And he sat
and listened, in the dust of the road, listened to his heart, beating tiredly and
sadly, waited for a voice. Many an hour he crouched, listening, saw no
images any more, fell into emptiness, let himself fall, without seeing a path.
And when he felt the wound burning, he silently spoke the Om, filled
himself with Om. The monks in the garden saw him, and since he crouched
for many hours, and dust was gathering on his gray hair, one of them came
to him and placed two bananas in front of him. The old man did not see
him.
From this petrified state, he was awoken by a hand touching his shoulder.
Instantly, he recognised this touch, this tender, bashful touch, and regained
his senses. He rose and greeted Vasudeva, who had followed him. And
when he looked into Vasudeva’s friendly face, into the small wrinkles,

which were as if they were filled with nothing but his smile, into the happy
eyes, then he smiled too. Now he saw the bananas lying in front of him,
picked them up, gave one to the ferryman, ate the other one himself. After
this, he silently went back into the forest with Vasudeva, returned home to
the ferry. Neither one talked about what had happened today, neither one
mentioned the boy’s name, neither one spoke about him running away,
neither one spoke about the wound. In the hut, Siddhartha lay down on his
bed, and when after a while Vasudeva came to him, to offer him a bowl of
coconut-milk, he already found him asleep.

OM
For a long time, the wound continued to burn. Many a traveller
Siddhartha had to ferry across the river who was accompanied by a son or a
daughter, and he saw none of them without envying him, without thinking:
“So many, so many thousands possess this sweetest of good fortunes—why
don’t I? Even bad people, even thieves and robbers have children and love
them, and are being loved by them, all except for me.” Thus simply, thus
without reason he now thought, thus similar to the childlike people he had
become.
Differently than before, he now looked upon people, less smart, less
proud, but instead warmer, more curious, more involved. When he ferried
travellers of the ordinary kind, childlike people, businessmen, warriors,
women, these people did not seem alien to him as they used to: he
understood them, he understood and shared their life, which was not guided
by thoughts and insight, but solely by urges and wishes, he felt like them.
Though he was near perfection and was bearing his final wound, it still
seemed to him as if those childlike people were his brothers, their vanities,
desires for possession, and ridiculous aspects were no longer ridiculous to
him, became understandable, became lovable, even became worthy of
veneration to him. The blind love of a mother for her child, the stupid, blind
pride of a conceited father for his only son, the blind, wild desire of a
young, vain woman for jewelry and admiring glances from men, all of these
urges, all of this childish stuff, all of these simple, foolish, but immensely
strong, strongly living, strongly prevailing urges and desires were now no
childish notions for Siddhartha any more, he saw people living for their
sake, saw them achieving infinitely much for their sake, travelling,
conducting wars, suffering infinitely much, bearing infinitely much, and he
could love them for it, he saw life, that what is alive, the indestructible, the
Brahman in each of their passions, each of their acts. Worthy of love and
admiration were these people in their blind loyalty, their blind strength and

tenacity. They lacked nothing, there was nothing the knowledgeable one,
the thinker, had to put him above them except for one little thing, a single,
tiny, small thing: the consciousness, the conscious thought of the oneness of
all life. And Siddhartha even doubted in many an hour, whether this
knowledge, this thought was to be valued thus highly, whether it might not
also perhaps be a childish idea of the thinking people, of the thinking and
childlike people. In all other respects, the worldly people were of equal rank
to the wise men, were often far superior to them, just as animals too can,
after all, in some moments, seem to be superior to humans in their tough,
unrelenting performance of what is necessary.
Slowly blossomed, slowly ripened in Siddhartha the realisation, the
knowledge, what wisdom actually was, what the goal of his long search
was. It was nothing but a readiness of the soul, an ability, a secret art, to
think every moment, while living his life, the thought of oneness, to be able
to feel and inhale the oneness. Slowly this blossomed in him, was shining
back at him from Vasudeva’s old, childlike face: harmony, knowledge of the
eternal perfection of the world, smiling, oneness.
But the wound still burned, longingly and bitterly Siddhartha thought of
his son, nurtured his love and tenderness in his heart, allowed the pain to
gnaw at him, committed all foolish acts of love. Not by itself, this flame
would go out.
And one day, when the wound burned violently, Siddhartha ferried across
the river, driven by a yearning, got off the boat and was willing to go to the
city and to look for his son. The river flowed softly and quietly, it was the
dry season, but its voice sounded strange: it laughed! It laughed clearly. The
river laughed, it laughed brightly and clearly at the old ferryman.
Siddhartha stopped, he bent over the water, in order to hear even better, and
he saw his face reflected in the quietly moving waters, and in this reflected
face there was something, which reminded him, something he had
forgotten, and as he thought about it, he found it: this face resembled
another face, which he used to know and love and also fear. It resembled his
father’s face, the Brahman. And he remembered how he, a long time ago, as
a young man, had forced his father to let him go to the penitents, how he
had bid his farewell to him, how he had gone and had never come back.
Had his father not also suffered the same pain for him, which he now
suffered for his son? Had his father not long since died, alone, without

having seen his son again? Did he not have to expect the same fate for
himself? Was it not a comedy, a strange and stupid matter, this repetition,
this running around in a fateful circle?
The river laughed. Yes, so it was, everything came back, which had not
been suffered and solved up to its end, the same pain was suffered over and
over again. But Siddhartha went back into the boat and ferried back to the
hut, thinking of his father, thinking of his son, laughed at by the river, at
odds with himself, tending towards despair, and not less tending towards
laughing along at himself and the entire world.
Alas, the wound was not blossoming yet, his heart was still fighting his
fate, cheerfulness and victory were not yet shining from his suffering.
Nevertheless, he felt hope, and once he had returned to the hut, he felt an
undefeatable desire to open up to Vasudeva, to show him everything, the
master of listening, to say everything.
Vasudeva was sitting in the hut and weaving a basket. He no longer used
the ferry-boat, his eyes were starting to get weak, and not just his eyes; his
arms and hands as well. Unchanged and flourishing was only the joy and
the cheerful benevolence of his face.
Siddhartha sat down next to the old man, slowly he started talking. What
they had never talked about, he now told him of, of his walk to the city, at
that time, of the burning wound, of his envy at the sight of happy fathers, of
his knowledge of the foolishness of such wishes, of his futile fight against
them. He reported everything, he was able to say everything, even the most
embarrassing parts, everything could be said, everything shown, everything
he could tell. He presented his wound, also told how he fled today, how he
ferried across the water, a childish run-away, willing to walk to the city,
how the river had laughed.
While he spoke, spoke for a long time, while Vasudeva was listening
with a quiet face, Vasudeva’s listening gave Siddhartha a stronger sensation
than ever before, he sensed how his pain, his fears flowed over to him, how
his secret hope flowed over, came back at him from his counterpart. To
show his wound to this listener was the same as bathing it in the river, until
it had cooled and become one with the river. While he was still speaking,
still admitting and confessing, Siddhartha felt more and more that this was
no longer Vasudeva, no longer a human being who was listening to him,
that this motionless listener was absorbing his confession into himself like a

tree the rain, that this motionless man was the river itself, that he was God
himself, that he was the eternal itself. And while Siddhartha stopped
thinking of himself and his wound, this realisation of Vasudeva’s changed
character took possession of him, and the more he felt it and entered into it,
the less wondrous it became, the more he realised that everything was in
order and natural, that Vasudeva had already been like this for a long time,
almost forever, that only he had not quite recognised it, yes, that he himself
had almost reached the same state. He felt, that he was now seeing old
Vasudeva as the people see the gods, and that this could not last; in his
heart, he started bidding his farewell to Vasudeva. Throughout all this, he
talked incessantly.
When he had finished talking, Vasudeva turned his friendly eyes, which
had grown slightly weak, at him, said nothing, let his silent love and
cheerfulness, understanding and knowledge, shine at him. He took
Siddhartha’s hand, led him to the seat by the bank, sat down with him,
smiled at the river.
“You’ve heard it laugh,” he said. “But you haven’t heard everything.
Let’s listen, you’ll hear more.”
They listened. Softly sounded the river, singing in many voices.
Siddhartha looked into the water, and images appeared to him in the moving
water: his father appeared, lonely, mourning for his son; he himself
appeared, lonely, he also being tied with the bondage of yearning to his
distant son; his son appeared, lonely as well, the boy, greedily rushing along
the burning course of his young wishes, each one heading for his goal, each
one obsessed by the goal, each one suffering. The river sang with a voice of
suffering, longingly it sang, longingly, it flowed towards its goal,
lamentingly its voice sang.
“Do you hear?” Vasudeva’s mute gaze asked. Siddhartha nodded.
“Listen better!” Vasudeva whispered.
Siddhartha made an effort to listen better. The image of his father, his
own image, the image of his son merged, Kamala’s image also appeared
and was dispersed, and the image of Govinda, and other images, and they
merged with each other, turned all into the river, headed all, being the river,
for the goal, longing, desiring, suffering, and the river’s voice sounded full
of yearning, full of burning woe, full of unsatisfiable desire. For the goal,
the river was heading, Siddhartha saw it hurrying, the river, which consisted

of him and his loved ones and of all people he had ever seen, all of these
waves and waters were hurrying, suffering, towards goals, many goals, the
waterfall, the lake, the rapids, the sea, and all goals were reached, and every
goal was followed by a new one, and the water turned into vapour and rose
to the sky, turned into rain and poured down from the sky, turned into a
source, a stream, a river, headed forward once again, flowed on once again.
But the longing voice had changed. It still resounded, full of suffering,
searching, but other voices joined it, voices of joy and of suffering, good
and bad voices, laughing and sad ones, a hundred voices, a thousand voices.
Siddhartha listened. He was now nothing but a listener, completely
concentrated on listening, completely empty, he felt, that he had now
finished learning to listen. Often before, he had heard all this, these many
voices in the river, today it sounded new. Already, he could no longer tell
the many voices apart, not the happy ones from the weeping ones, not the
ones of children from those of men, they all belonged together, the
lamentation of yearning and the laughter of the knowledgeable one, the
scream of rage and the moaning of the dying ones, everything was one,
everything was intertwined and connected, entangled a thousand times. And
everything together, all voices, all goals, all yearning, all suffering, all
pleasure, all that was good and evil, all of this together was the world. All
of it together was the flow of events, was the music of life. And when
Siddhartha was listening attentively to this river, this song of a thousand
voices, when he neither listened to the suffering nor the laughter, when he
did not tie his soul to any particular voice and submerged his self into it, but
when he heard them all, perceived the whole, the oneness, then the great
song of the thousand voices consisted of a single word, which was Om: the
perfection.
“Do you hear,” Vasudeva’s gaze asked again.
Brightly, Vasudeva’s smile was shining, floating radiantly over all the
wrinkles of his old face, as the Om was floating in the air over all the voices
of the river. Brightly his smile was shining, when he looked at his friend,
and brightly the same smile was now starting to shine on Siddhartha’s face
as well. His wound blossomed, his suffering was shining, his self had flown
into the oneness.
In this hour, Siddhartha stopped fighting his fate, stopped suffering. On
his face flourished the cheerfulness of a knowledge, which is no longer

opposed by any will, which knows perfection, which is in agreement with
the flow of events, with the current of life, full of sympathy for the pain of
others, full of sympathy for the pleasure of others, devoted to the flow,
belonging to the oneness.
When Vasudeva rose from the seat by the bank, when he looked into
Siddhartha’s eyes and saw the cheerfulness of the knowledge shining in
them, he softly touched his shoulder with his hand, in this careful and
tender manner, and said: “I’ve been waiting for this hour, my dear. Now that
it has come, let me leave. For a long time, I’ve been waiting for this hour;
for a long time, I’ve been Vasudeva the ferryman. Now it’s enough.
Farewell, but, farewell, river, farewell, Siddhartha!”
Siddhartha made a deep bow before him who bid his farewell.
“I’ve known it,” he said quietly. “You’ll go into the forests?”
“I’m going into the forests, I’m going into the oneness,” spoke Vasudeva
with a bright smile.
With a bright smile, he left; Siddhartha watched him leaving. With deep
joy, with deep solemnity he watched him leave, saw his steps full of peace,
saw his head full of lustre, saw his body full of light.

GOVINDA
Together with other monks, Govinda used to spend the time of rest
between pilgrimages in the pleasure-grove, which the courtesan Kamala
had given to the followers of Gotama for a gift. He heard talk of an old
ferryman, who lived one day’s journey away by the river, and who was
regarded as a wise man by many. When Govinda went back on his way, he
chose the path to the ferry, eager to see the ferryman. Because, though he
had lived his entire life by the rules, though he was also looked upon with
veneration by the younger monks on account of his age and his modesty,
the restlessness and the searching still had not perished from his heart.
He came to the river and asked the old man to ferry him over, and when
they got off the boat on the other side, he said to the old man: “You’re very
good to us monks and pilgrims, you have already ferried many of us across
the river. Aren’t you too, ferryman, a searcher for the right path?”
Quoth Siddhartha, smiling from his old eyes: “Do you call yourself a
searcher, oh venerable one, though you are already well on in years and are
wearing the robe of Gotama’s monks?”
“It’s true, I’m old,” spoke Govinda, “but I haven’t stopped searching.
Never I’ll stop searching, this seems to be my destiny. You too, so it seems
to me, have been searching. Would you like to tell me something, oh
honourable one?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “What should I possibly have to tell you, oh venerable
one? Perhaps that you’re searching far too much? That in all that searching,
you don’t find the time for finding?”
“How come?” asked Govinda.
“When someone is searching,” said Siddhartha, “then it might easily
happen that the only thing his eyes still see is that what he searches for, that
he is unable to find anything, to let anything enter his mind, because he
always thinks of nothing but the object of his search, because he has a goal,

because he is obsessed by the goal. Searching means: having a goal. But
finding means: being free, being open, having no goal. You, oh venerable
one, are perhaps indeed a searcher, because, striving for your goal, there are
many things you don’t see, which are directly in front of your eyes.”
“I don’t quite understand yet,” asked Govinda, “what do you mean by
this?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “A long time ago, oh venerable one, many years ago,
you’ve once before been at this river and have found a sleeping man by the
river, and have sat down with him to guard his sleep. But, oh Govinda, you
did not recognise the sleeping man.”
Astonished, as if he had been the object of a magic spell, the monk
looked into the ferryman’s eyes.
“Are you Siddhartha?” he asked with a timid voice. “I wouldn’t have
recognised you this time as well! From my heart, I’m greeting you,
Siddhartha; from my heart, I’m happy to see you once again! You’ve
changed a lot, my friend.—And so you’ve now become a ferryman?”
In a friendly manner, Siddhartha laughed. “A ferryman, yes. Many
people, Govinda, have to change a lot, have to wear many a robe, I am one
of those, my dear. Be welcome, Govinda, and spend the night in my hut.”
Govinda stayed the night in the hut and slept on the bed which used to be
Vasudeva’s bed. Many questions he posed to the friend of his youth, many
things Siddhartha had to tell him from his life.
When in the next morning the time had come to start the day’s journey,
Govinda said, not without hesitation, these words: “Before I’ll continue on
my path, Siddhartha, permit me to ask one more question. Do you have a
teaching? Do you have a faith or a knowledge you follow, which helps you
to live and to do right?”
Quoth Siddhartha: “You know, my dear, that I already as a young man, in
those days when we lived with the penitents in the forest, started to distrust
teachers and teachings and to turn my back to them. I have stuck with this.
Nevertheless, I have had many teachers since then. A beautiful courtesan
has been my teacher for a long time, and a rich merchant was my teacher,
and some gamblers with dice. Once, even a follower of Buddha, travelling
on foot, has been my teacher; he sat with me when I had fallen asleep in the
forest, on the pilgrimage. I’ve also learned from him, I’m also grateful to

him, very grateful. But most of all, I have learned here from this river and
from my predecessor, the ferryman Vasudeva. He was a very simple person,
Vasudeva, he was no thinker, but he knew what is necessary just as well as
Gotama, he was a perfect man, a saint.”
Govinda said: “Still, oh Siddhartha, you love a bit to mock people, as it
seems to me. I believe in you and know that you haven’t followed a teacher.
But haven’t you found something by yourself, though you’ve found no
teachings, you still found certain thoughts, certain insights, which are your
own and which help you to live? If you would like to tell me some of these,
you would delight my heart.”
Quoth Siddhartha: “I’ve had thoughts, yes, and insight, again and again.
Sometimes, for an hour or for an entire day, I have felt knowledge in me, as
one would feel life in one’s heart. There have been many thoughts, but it
would be hard for me to convey them to you. Look, my dear Govinda, this
is one of my thoughts, which I have found: wisdom cannot be passed on.
Wisdom which a wise man tries to pass on to someone always sounds like
foolishness.”
“Are you kidding?” asked Govinda.
“I’m not kidding. I’m telling you what I’ve found. Knowledge can be
conveyed, but not wisdom. It can be found, it can be lived, it is possible to
be carried by it, miracles can be performed with it, but it cannot be
expressed in words and taught. This was what I, even as a young man,
sometimes suspected, what has driven me away from the teachers. I have
found a thought, Govinda, which you’ll again regard as a joke or
foolishness, but which is my best thought. It says: The opposite of every
truth is just as true! That’s like this: any truth can only be expressed and put
into words when it is one-sided. Everything is one-sided which can be
thought with thoughts and said with words, it’s all one-sided, all just one
half, all lacks completeness, roundness, oneness. When the exalted Gotama
spoke in his teachings of the world, he had to divide it into Sansara and
Nirvana, into deception and truth, into suffering and salvation. It cannot be
done differently, there is no other way for him who wants to teach. But the
world itself, what exists around us and inside of us, is never one-sided. A
person or an act is never entirely Sansara or entirely Nirvana, a person is
never entirely holy or entirely sinful. It does really seem like this, because
we are subject to deception, as if time was something real. Time is not real,

Govinda, I have experienced this often and often again. And if time is not
real, then the gap which seems to be between the world and the eternity,
between suffering and blissfulness, between evil and good, is also a
deception.”
“How come?” asked Govinda timidly.
“Listen well, my dear, listen well! The sinner, which I am and which you
are, is a sinner, but in times to come he will be Brahma again, he will reach
the Nirvana, will be Buddha—and now see: these ‘times to come’ are a
deception, are only a parable! The sinner is not on his way to become a
Buddha, he is not in the process of developing, though our capacity for
thinking does not know how else to picture these things. No, within the
sinner is now and today already the future Buddha, his future is already all
there, you have to worship in him, in you, in everyone the Buddha which is
coming into being, the possible, the hidden Buddha. The world, my friend
Govinda, is not imperfect, or on a slow path towards perfection: no, it is
perfect in every moment, all sin already carries the divine forgiveness in
itself, all small children already have the old person in themselves, all
infants already have death, all dying people the eternal life. It is not possible
for any person to see how far another one has already progressed on his
path; in the robber and dice-gambler, the Buddha is waiting; in the
Brahman, the robber is waiting. In deep meditation, there is the possibility
to put time out of existence, to see all life which was, is, and will be as if it
was simultaneous, and there everything is good, everything is perfect,
everything is Brahman. Therefore, I see whatever exists as good, death is to
me like life, sin like holiness, wisdom like foolishness, everything has to be
as it is, everything only requires my consent, only my willingness, my
loving agreement, to be good for me, to do nothing but work for my benefit,
to be unable to ever harm me. I have experienced on my body and on my
soul that I needed sin very much, I needed lust, the desire for possessions,
vanity, and needed the most shameful despair, in order to learn how to give
up all resistance, in order to learn how to love the world, in order to stop
comparing it to some world I wished, I imagined, some kind of perfection I
had made up, but to leave it as it is and to love it and to enjoy being a part
of it.—These, oh Govinda, are some of the thoughts which have come into
my mind.”

Siddhartha bent down, picked up a stone from the ground, and weighed it
in his hand.
“This here,” he said playing with it, “is a stone, and will, after a certain
time, perhaps turn into soil, and will turn from soil into a plant or animal or
human being. In the past, I would have said: This stone is just a stone, it is
worthless, it belongs to the world of the Maya; but because it might be able
to become also a human being and a spirit in the cycle of transformations,
therefore I also grant it importance. Thus, I would perhaps have thought in
the past. But today I think: this stone is a stone, it is also animal, it is also
god, it is also Buddha, I do not venerate and love it because it could turn
into this or that, but rather because it is already and always everything—and
it is this very fact, that it is a stone, that it appears to me now and today as a
stone, this is why I love it and see worth and purpose in each of its veins
and cavities, in the yellow, in the gray, in the hardness, in the sound it
makes when I knock at it, in the dryness or wetness of its surface. There are
stones which feel like oil or soap, and others like leaves, others like sand,
and every one is special and prays the Om in its own way, each one is
Brahman, but simultaneously and just as much it is a stone, is oily or juicy,
and this is the very fact which I like and regard as wonderful and worthy of
worship.—But let me speak no more of this. The words are not good for the
secret meaning, everything always becomes a bit different, as soon as it is
put into words, gets distorted a bit, a bit silly—yes, and this is also very
good, and I like it a lot, I also very much agree with this, that this what is
one man’s treasure and wisdom always sounds like foolishness to another
person.”
Govinda listened silently.
“Why have you told me this about the stone?” he asked hesitantly after a
pause.
“I did it without any specific intention. Or perhaps what I meant was, that
I love this very stone, and the river, and all these things we are looking at
and from which we can learn. I can love a stone, Govinda, and also a tree or
a piece of bark. These are things, and things can be loved. But I cannot love
words. Therefore, teachings are no good for me, they have no hardness, no
softness, no colours, no edges, no smell, no taste, they have nothing but
words. Perhaps it is these which keep you from finding peace, perhaps it is
the many words. Because salvation and virtue as well, Sansara and Nirvana

as well, are mere words, Govinda. There is no thing which would be
Nirvana; there is just the word Nirvana.”
Quoth Govinda: “Not just a word, my friend, is Nirvana. It is a thought.”
Siddhartha continued: “A thought, it might be so. I must confess to you,
my dear: I don’t differentiate much between thoughts and words. To be
honest, I also have no high opinion of thoughts. I have a better opinion of
things. Here on this ferry-boat, for instance, a man has been my predecessor
and teacher, a holy man, who has for many years simply believed in the
river, nothing else. He had noticed that the river spoke to him, he learned
from it, it educated and taught him, the river seemed to be a god to him, for
many years he did not know that every wind, every cloud, every bird, every
beetle was just as divine and knows just as much and can teach just as much
as the worshipped river. But when this holy man went into the forests, he
knew everything, knew more than you and me, without teachers, without
books, only because he had believed in the river.”
Govinda said: “But is that what you call ‘things’, actually something real,
something which has existence? Isn’t it just a deception of the Maya, just an
image and illusion? Your stone, your tree, your river—are they actually a
reality?”
“This too,” spoke Siddhartha, “I do not care very much about. Let the
things be illusions or not, after all I would then also be an illusion, and thus
they are always like me. This is what makes them so dear and worthy of
veneration for me: they are like me. Therefore, I can love them. And this is
now a teaching you will laugh about: love, oh Govinda, seems to me to be
the most important thing of all. To thoroughly understand the world, to
explain it, to despise it, may be the thing great thinkers do. But I’m only
interested in being able to love the world, not to despise it, not to hate it and
me, to be able to look upon it and me and all beings with love and
admiration and great respect.”
“This I understand,” spoke Govinda. “But this very thing was discovered
by the exalted one to be a deception. He commands benevolence, clemency,
sympathy, tolerance, but not love; he forbade us to tie our heart in love to
earthly things.”
“I know it,” said Siddhartha; his smile shone golden. “I know it,
Govinda. And behold, with this we are right in the middle of the thicket of
opinions, in the dispute about words. For I cannot deny, my words of love

are in a contradiction, a seeming contradiction with Gotama’s words. For
this very reason, I distrust in words so much, for I know, this contradiction
is a deception. I know that I am in agreement with Gotama. How should he
not know love, he, who has discovered all elements of human existence in
their transitoriness, in their meaninglessness, and yet loved people thus
much, to use a long, laborious life only to help them, to teach them! Even
with him, even with your great teacher, I prefer the thing over the words,
place more importance on his acts and life than on his speeches, more on
the gestures of his hand than his opinions. Not in his speech, not in his
thoughts, I see his greatness, only in his actions, in his life.”
For a long time, the two old men said nothing. Then spoke Govinda,
while bowing for a farewell: “I thank you, Siddhartha, for telling me some
of your thoughts. They are partially strange thoughts, not all have been
instantly understandable to me. This being as it may, I thank you, and I wish
you to have calm days.”
(But secretly he thought to himself: This Siddhartha is a bizarre person,
he expresses bizarre thoughts, his teachings sound foolish. So differently
sound the exalted one’s pure teachings, clearer, purer, more
comprehensible, nothing strange, foolish, or silly is contained in them. But
different from his thoughts seemed to me Siddhartha’s hands and feet, his
eyes, his forehead, his breath, his smile, his greeting, his walk. Never again,
after our exalted Gotama has become one with the Nirvana, never since
then have I met a person of whom I felt: this is a holy man! Only him, this
Siddhartha, I have found to be like this. May his teachings be strange, may
his words sound foolish; out of his gaze and his hand, his skin and his hair,
out of every part of him shines a purity, shines a calmness, shines a
cheerfulness and mildness and holiness, which I have seen in no other
person since the final death of our exalted teacher.)
As Govinda thought like this, and there was a conflict in his heart, he
once again bowed to Siddhartha, drawn by love. Deeply he bowed to him
who was calmly sitting.
“Siddhartha,” he spoke, “we have become old men. It is unlikely for one
of us to see the other again in this incarnation. I see, beloved, that you have
found peace. I confess that I haven’t found it. Tell me, oh honourable one,
one more word, give me something on my way which I can grasp, which I

can understand! Give me something to be with me on my path. It is often
hard, my path, often dark, Siddhartha.”
Siddhartha said nothing and looked at him with the ever unchanged, quiet
smile. Govinda stared at his face, with fear, with yearning, suffering, and
the eternal search was visible in his look, eternal not-finding.
Siddhartha saw it and smiled.
“Bend down to me!” he whispered quietly in Govinda’s ear. “Bend down
to me! Like this, even closer! Very close! Kiss my forehead, Govinda!”
But while Govinda with astonishment, and yet drawn by great love and
expectation, obeyed his words, bent down closely to him and touched his
forehead with his lips, something miraculous happened to him. While his
thoughts were still dwelling on Siddhartha’s wondrous words, while he was
still struggling in vain and with reluctance to think away time, to imagine
Nirvana and Sansara as one, while even a certain contempt for the words of
his friend was fighting in him against an immense love and veneration, this
happened to him:
He no longer saw the face of his friend Siddhartha, instead he saw other
faces, many, a long sequence, a flowing river of faces, of hundreds, of
thousands, which all came and disappeared, and yet all seemed to be there
simultaneously, which all constantly changed and renewed themselves, and
which were still all Siddhartha. He saw the face of a fish, a carp, with an
infinitely painfully opened mouth, the face of a dying fish, with fading eyes
—he saw the face of a new-born child, red and full of wrinkles, distorted
from crying—he saw the face of a murderer, he saw him plunging a knife
into the body of another person—he saw, in the same second, this criminal
in bondage, kneeling and his head being chopped off by the executioner
with one blow of his sword—he saw the bodies of men and women, naked
in positions and cramps of frenzied love—he saw corpses stretched out,
motionless, cold, void—he saw the heads of animals, of boars, of
crocodiles, of elephants, of bulls, of birds—he saw gods, saw Krishna, saw
Agni—he saw all of these figures and faces in a thousand relationships with
one another, each one helping the other, loving it, hating it, destroying it,
giving re-birth to it, each one was a will to die, a passionately painful
confession of transitoriness, and yet none of them died, each one only
transformed, was always reborn, received evermore a new face, without any
time having passed between the one and the other face—and all of these

figures and faces rested, flowed, generated themselves, floated along and
merged with each other, and they were all constantly covered by something
thin, without individuality of its own, but yet existing, like a thin glass or
ice, like a transparent skin, a shell or mold or mask of water, and this mask
was smiling, and this mask was Siddhartha’s smiling face, which he,
Govinda, in this very same moment touched with his lips. And, Govinda
saw it like this, this smile of the mask, this smile of oneness above the
flowing forms, this smile of simultaneousness above the thousand births
and deaths, this smile of Siddhartha was precisely the same, was precisely
of the same kind as the quiet, delicate, impenetrable, perhaps benevolent,
perhaps mocking, wise, thousand-fold smile of Gotama, the Buddha, as he
had seen it himself with great respect a hundred times. Like this, Govinda
knew, the perfected ones are smiling.
Not knowing any more whether time existed, whether the vision had
lasted a second or a hundred years, not knowing any more whether there
existed a Siddhartha, a Gotama, a me and a you, feeling in his innermost
self as if he had been wounded by a divine arrow, the injury of which tasted
sweet, being enchanted and dissolved in his innermost self, Govinda still
stood for a little while bent over Siddhartha’s quiet face, which he had just
kissed, which had just been the scene of all manifestations, all
transformations, all existence. The face was unchanged, after under its
surface the depth of the thousand-foldness had closed up again, he smiled
silently, smiled quietly and softly, perhaps very benevolently, perhaps very
mockingly, precisely as he used to smile, the exalted one.
Deeply, Govinda bowed; tears he knew nothing of, ran down his old face;
like a fire burned the feeling of the most intimate love, the humblest
veneration in his heart. Deeply, he bowed, touching the ground, before him
who was sitting motionlessly, whose smile reminded him of everything he
had ever loved in his life, what had ever been valuable and holy to him in
his life.

I wanted only to try to live in accord with the promptings which came from my true self. Why was that so very
difficult?
Prologue
I cannot tell my story without reaching a long way back. If it were possible I would reach back farther still-into the very first years of my childhood, and beyond them into distant ancestral past. Novelists when they write
novels tend to take an almost godlike attitude toward their subject, pretending to a total comprehension of
the story, a man's life, which they can therefore recount as God Himself might, nothing standing between them
and the naked truth, the entire story meaningful in every detail. I am as little able to do this as the novelist is, even
though my story is more important to me than any novelist's is to him--for this is my story; it is the story of a man,
not of an invented, or possible, or idealized, or otherwise absent figure, but of a unique being of flesh and blood.
Yet, what a real living human being is made of seems to be less understood today than at any time before, and
men--each one of whom represents a unique and valuable experiment on the part of nature--are therefore shot
wholesale nowadays. If we were not something more than unique human beings, if each one of us could really be
done away with once and for all by a single bullet, storytelling would lose all purpose. But every man is more than
just himself; he also represents the unique, the very special and always significant and remarkable point at
which the world's phenomena intersect, only once in this way and never again. That is why every man's story
is important, eternal, sacred; that is why every man, as long as he lives and fulfills the will of nature, is wondrous,
and worthy of every consideration. In each individual the spirit has become flesh, in each man the creation
suffers, within each one a redeemer is nailed to the cross. Few people nowadays know what man is. Many
sense this ignorance and die the more easily because of it, the same way that I will die more easily once
I have completed this story. I do not consider myself less ignorant than most people. I have been and still
am a seeker, but I have ceased to question stars and books; I have begun to listen to the teachings my blood
whispers to me. My story is not a pleasant one; it is neither sweet nor harmonious, as invented stories are; it
has the taste of nonsense and chaos, of madness and dreams--like the lives of all men who stop deceiving
themselves. Each man's life represents a road toward himself, an attempt at such a road, the intimation of a
path. No man has ever been entirely and completely himself. Yet each one strives to become that--one in an
awkward, the other in a more intelligent way, each as best he can. Each man carries the vestiges of his birth-the slime and eggshells of his primeval past--with him to the end of his days. Some never become human,
remaining frog, lizard, ant. Some are human above the waist, fish below. Each represents a gamble on the
part of nature in creation of the human. We all share the same origin, our mothers; all of us come in
at the same door. But each of us--experiments of the depths--strives toward his own destiny. We can
understand one another; but each of us is able to interpret himself to himself alone.
1) Two Realms
I shall begin my story with an experience I had when I was ten and attended our small town's Latin school.
The sweetness of many things from that time still stirs and touches me with melancholy: dark and
well-lighted alleys, houses and towers, chimes and faces, rooms rich and comfortable, warm and relaxed,
rooms pregnant with secrets. Everything bears the scent of warm intimacy, servant girls, household remedies,
and dried fruits. The realms of day and night, two different worlds coming from two opposite poles, mingled
during this time. My parents' house made up one realm, yet its boundaries were even narrower, actually
embracing only my parents themselves. This realm was familiar to me in almost every way--mother and
father, love and strictness, model behavior, and school. It was a realm of brilliance, clarity, and cleanliness,
gentle conversations, washed hands, clean clothes, and good manners. This was the world in which morning
hymns were sung and Christmas celebrated. Straight lines and paths led into the future: there were duty and
guilt, bad conscience and confession, forgiveness and good resolutions, love, reverence, wisdom and the

words of the Bible. If one wanted an unsullied and orderly life, one made sure one was in league with this
world. The other realm, however, overlapping half our house, was completely different; it smelled different,
spoke a different language, promised and demanded different things. This second world contained servant
girls and workmen, ghost stories, rumors of scandal. It was dominated by a loud mixture of horrendous,
intriguing, frightful, mysterious things, including slaughterhouses and prisons, drunkards and screeching
fishwives, calving cows, horses sinking to their death, tales of robberies, murders, and suicides. All these wild
and cruel, attractive and hideous things surrounded us, could be found in the next alley, the next house.
Policemen and tramps, drunkards who beat their wives, droves of young girls pouring out of factories at night,
old women who put the hex on you so that you fell ill, thieves hiding in the forest, arsonists nabbed by country
police--everywhere this second vigorous world erupted and gave off its scent, everywhere, that is, except in
our parents' rooms. And that was good. It was wonderful that peace and orderliness, quiet and a good
conscience, forgiveness and love, ruled in this one realm, and it was wonderful that the rest existed, too, the
multitude of harsh noises, of sullenness and violence, from which one could still escape with a leap into one's
mother's lap. It was strange how both realms bordered on each other, how close together they were! For
example, when Lina, our servant girl, sat with us by the living-room door at evening prayers and added her
clear voice to the hymn, her washed hands folded on her smoothed-down apron, she belonged with father and
mother, to us, to those that dwelled in light and righteousness. But afterwards, in the kitchen or woodshed,
when she told me the story of "the tiny man with no head, " or when she argued with neighborhood women in
the butchershop, she was someone else, belonged to another world which veiled her with mystery. And that's
how it was with everything, most of all with myself. Unquestionably I belonged to the realm of light and
righteousness; I was my parents' child. But in whichever direction I turned I perceived the other world, and I
lived within that other world as well, though often a stranger to it, and suffering from panic and a bad
conscience. There were times when I actually preferred living in the forbidden realm, and frequently, returning
to the realm of light--necessary and good as it may have been -- seemed almost like returning to something
less beautiful, something rather drab and tedious. Sometimes I was absolutely certain that my destiny was to
become like mother and father, as clear-sighted and unspoiled, as orderly and superior as they. But this goal
seemed far away and to reach it meant attending endless schools, studying, passing tests and examinations,
and this way led past and through the other, darker realm. It was not at all impossible that one might remain a
part of it and sink into it. There were stories of sons who had gone astray, stories I read with passion. These
stories always pictured the homecoming as such a relief and as something so extraordinary that I felt
convinced that this alone was the right, the best, the sought-for thing. Still, the part of the story set among the
evil and the lost was more appealing by far, and--if I could have admitted it--at times I didn't want the Prodigal
Son to repent and be found again. But one didn't dare think this, much less say it out loud. It was only present
somehow as a premonition, a possibility at the root of one's consciousness. When I pictured the devil to myself
I could easily imagine him on the street below, disguised or undisguised, or at the country fair or in a bar, but
never at home with us. My sisters, too, belonged to the realm of light. It often seemed to me that they had a
greater natural affinity to my father and mother; they were better, better mannered, had fewer faults than I.
They had their faults, of course; they had their bad moments, but these did not appear to go very deep as they
did with me, whose contact with evil often grew so oppressive and painful, and to whom the dark world
seemed so much closer. Sisters, like parents, were to be comforted and respected; if I had quarreled with them
I always reproached myself afterwards, felt like the instigator, the one who had to ask for forgiveness. For by
offending my sisters I offended my parents, all that was good and superior. There were secrets I would far
rather have shared with the lowest hoodlum than with my sisters. On good days, when my conscience did not
trouble me, it was often delightful to play with them, to be good and decent as they were and to see myself in a
noble light. That's what it must have been like to be an angel! It was the highest state one could think of. But
how infrequent such days were! Often at play, at some harmless activity, I became so fervent and headstrong
that I was too much for my sisters; the quarrels and unhappiness this led to threw me into such a rage that I
became horrible, did and said things so awful they seared my heart even as I said them. Then followed harsh
hours of gloomy regret and contrition, the painful moment when I begged forgiveness, to be followed again by
beams of light, a quiet, thankful, undivided gladness. I attended the Latin school. The mayor's son and the
head forester's son were in my class; both visited me at home at times, and though they were quite unruly, they
were both members of the good, the legal world. Yet this did not mean that I had no dealings with some of the
neighborhood boys who attended public school and on whom we usually looked down. It is with one of them

that I must begin my story. One half-holiday--I was little more than ten years old--two neighborhood kids and
I were roaming about when a much bigger boy, a strong and burly kid from public school, the tailor's son,
joined us. His father drank and the whole family had a bad name. I had heard much about Franz Kromer, was
afraid of him, didn't at all like that he came up to us. His manners were already those of a man and he imitated
the walk and speech of young factory workers. Under his leadership we clambered down the riverbank by the
bridge and hid below the first arch. The narrow strip between the vaulted wall of the bridge and the lazily
flowing river was covered with nothing but refuse, shards, tangled bundles of rusty wire and other rubbish.
Occasionally one could pick up something useful here. Franz Kromer instructed us to comb the area and show
him what we found. He would either pocket it or fling it into the river. He put us on the lookout for objects
made of lead, brass, and tin, all of which he tucked away--also an old comb made of horn. I felt very uneasy in
his presence, not only because I knew that my father would not have approved of my being seen in his
company, but because I was simply afraid of Franz himself, though I was glad that he seemed to accept me
and treat me like the others. He gave instructions and we obeyed--it seemed like an old habit, even though this
was the first time I was with him. After a while we sat down. Franz spit into the water, and he looked like a
man; he spit through a gap between his teeth and hit whatever he aimed at. A conversation started up, and the
boys began boasting and heaping praise on themselves for all sorts of schoolboy heroics and tricks they had
played. I kept quiet and yet was afraid I'd be noticed, that my silence might particularly incur Kromer's wrath.
My two friends had begun to shun me the very moment Franz Kromer had joined us. I was a stranger among
them and felt that my manners and clothes presented a kind of challenge. As a Latin school boy, the spoiled
son of a well-to-do father, it would be impossible for Franz to like me, and the other two, I felt acutely, would
soon disown and desert me. Finally, out of sheer nervousness, I began telling a story too. I invented a long
tale about a robbery in which I filled the role of hero. In a garden near the mill, I said, together with a friend, I
had stolen a whole sackful of apples one night, and by no means ordinary apples, but apples of the very best
sort. It was the fear of the moment that made me seek refuge in this story--inventing and telling stories came
naturally to me. In order not to fall immediately silent again, and perhaps become involved in something
worse, I gave a complete display of my narrative powers. One of us, I continued, had had to stand guard while
the other climbed the tree and shook out the apples. Moreover, the sack had grown so heavy that we had to
open it again, leaving half the apples behind. But half an hour later we had returned and fetched the rest. When
I had finished I waited for approval of some sort. I had warmed to my subject toward the end and been carried
away by my own eloquence. The two younger ones kept silent, waiting, but Franz Kromer looked sharply at
me out of narrowed eyes and asked threateningly: "Is that true?" "Yes, " I said. "Really and truly?" "Yes,
really and truly, " I insisted stubbornly while choking inwardly with fear. "Would you swear to it?" I became
very afraid but at once said yes. "Then say: By God and the grace of my soul. " "By God and the grace of my
soul, " I said. "Well, all right, " he said and turned away. I thought everything was all right now, and was glad
when he got up and turned to go home. After we had climbed back up to the bridge, I said hesitantly that I
would have to head for home myself. "You can't be in that much of a hurry. " Franz laughed. "We're going in
the same direction, aren't we?" Slowly he ambled on and I didn't dare run off; he was in fact walking in the
direction of my house. When we stood in front of it and I saw the front door and the big brass knocker, the sun
in the windows and the curtain in my mother's room, I breathed a sigh of relief. When I quickly opened the
door and slipped in, reaching to slam it shut, Franz Kromer edged in behind me. In the cool tiled passageway,
lit only by one window facing the courtyard, he stood beside me, held on to me and said softly: "Don't be in
such a rush, you. " I looked at him, terrified. His grip on my arm was like a vise. I wondered what he might
have in mind and whether he wanted to hurt me. I tried to decide whether if I screamed now, screamed loud
and piercingly, someone could come down from above quickly enough to save me. But I gave up the idea.
"What is it?" I asked. "What do you want?" "Nothing much. I only wanted to ask you something. The others
don't have to hear it. " "Oh, really? I can't think of anything to say to you. I have to go up, you know. " Softly
Franz Kromer asked: "You know who owns the orchard by the mill, don't you?" "I'm not sure. The miller, I
think. " Franz had put his arm around me and now he drew me so close I was forced to look into his face
inches away. His eyes were evil, he smiled maliciously; his face was filled with cruelty and a sense of power.
"Well, I can tell you for certain whose orchard that is. I've known for some time that someone had stolen
apples there and that the man who owns it said he'd give two marks to anyone who'd tell him who swiped
them. " "Oh, my God!" I exclaimed. "You wouldn't do that, would you?" I felt it would be useless to appeal
to his sense of honor. He came from the other world: betrayal was no crime to him. I sensed this acutely. The

people from the other world were not like us in these matters. "Not say anything?" laughed Kromer. "Kid,
what do you take me for? Do you think I own a mint? I'm poor, I don't have a wealthy father like you and if I
can earn two marks I earn them any way I can. Maybe he'll even give me more. " Suddenly he let go of me.
The passageway no longer smelled of peace and safety, the world around me began to crumble. He would give
me away to the police! I was a criminal; my father would be informed--perhaps even the police would come.
All the dread of chaos threatened me, everything ugly and dangerous was united against me. It meant nothing
that I'd filched nothing. I'd sworn I had! Tears welled up in my eyes. I felt I had to strike a bargain and
desperately I groped through all my pockets. Not a single apple, no pocket knife, I had nothing at all. I thought
of my watch, an old silver watch that didn't work, that I wore just for the fun of it. It had been my
grandmother's. Quickly I took it off. I said: "Kromer, listen! Don't give me away. It wouldn't be fair if you
did. I'll give you my watch as a present, here, take a look. Otherwise I've nothing at all. You can have it, it's
made of silver, and the works, well, there's something slightly wrong with them; you have to have it fixed. "
He smiled and weighed the watch in his palm. I looked at his hand and felt how brutal and deeply hostile it
was to me, how it reached for my life and peace. "It's made of silver, " I said hesitantly. "I don't give a damn
for your silver and your old watch, " he said scornfully. "Get it fixed yourself. " "But, Franz!" I exclaimed,
trembling with fear that he might run away. "Wait, wait a moment. Why don't you take it? It's really made of
silver, honest. And I don't have anything else. " He threw me a cold scornful look. "Well, you know who I'll
go to. Or I could go to the police too... I'm on good terms with the sergeant. " He turned as if to go. I held on
to his sleeve. I couldn't allow him to go. I would rather have died than suffer what might happen if he went off
like that. "Franz, " I implored, hoarse with excitement, "don't do anything foolish. You're only joking, aren't
you?" "Yes, I'm joking, but it could turn into an expensive joke. " "Just tell me what I'm supposed to do,
Franz. I'll do anything you ask. " He looked me up and down with narrowed eyes and laughed again. "Don't
be so stupid, " he said with false good humor. "You know as well as I that I'm in a position to earn two marks.
I'm not a rich man who can afford to throw them away, but you're rich--you even have a watch. All you have
to do is give me two marks; then everything will be all right. " I understood his logic. But two marks! That
was as much and as unattainable as ten, as a hundred, as a thousand. I didn't have a pfennig. There was a piggy
bank that my mother kept for me. When relatives came to visit they would drop in five- or ten-pfennig pieces.
That was all I had. I had no allowance at that time. "I just don't have any, " I said sadly. "I don't have any
money at all. But I'll give you everything else I have. I have a Western, tin soldiers, and a compass. Wait, I'll
get them for you. " Kromer's mouth merely twisted into a brief sneer. Then he spit on the floor. Harshly he
said: "You can keep your crap. A compass! Don't make me mad! You hear, I'm after money. " "But I don't
have any, I never get any, I can't help it. " "All right, then you'll bring me the two marks tomorrow. I'll wait
for you after school down near the market place. That's all. You'll see what'll happen if you don't bring it. "
"But where am I going to get it if I don't have any?" "There's plenty of money in your house. That's your
business. Tomorrow after school. And I'm telling you: if you don't have it with you... " He threw me a
withering look, spit once more, and vanished like a shadow. I couldn't even get upstairs. My life was wrecked.
I thought of running away and never coming back, or of drowning myself. However, I couldn't picture any of
this very clearly. In the dark, I sat down on the bottom step of our staircase, huddled up within myself,
abandoning myself to misery. That's where Lina found me weeping as she came downstairs with the basket to
fetch wood. I begged her not to say a word, then I went upstairs. To the right of the glass door hung my
father's hat and my mother's parasol; they gave me a feeling of home and comfort, and my heart greeted them
thankfully, as the Prodigal Son might greet the sight and smell of old familiar rooms. But all of it was lost to
me now, all of it belonged to the clear, well-lighted world of my father and mother, and I, guilty and deeply
engulfed in an alien world, was entangled in adventures and sin, threatened by an enemy, --by dangers, fear,
and shame. The hat and parasol, the old sandstone floor I was so fond of, the broad picture above the hall
cupboard, the voice of my elder sister coming to me from the living room were all more moving, more
precious, more delicious than ever before, but they had ceased to be a refuge and something I could rely on;
they had become an unmistakable reproach. None of this was mine any more, I could no longer take part in its
quiet cheerfulness. My feet had become muddied, I could not even wipe them clean on the mat; everywhere I
went I was followed by a darkness of which this world of home knew nothing. How many secrets I had had,
how often I had been afraid--but all of it had been child's play compared with what I brought home with me
today. I was haunted by misfortune, it was reaching out toward me so that not even my mother could protect
me, since she was not even allowed to know. Whether my crime was stealing or lying--(hadn't I sworn a false

oath by God and everything that was sacred?)--was immaterial. My sin was not specifically this or that but
consisted of having shaken hands with the devil. Why had I gone along? Why had I obeyed Kromer--better
even than I had ever obeyed my father? Why had I invented the story, building myself up with a crime as
though it were a heroic act? The devil held me in his clutches, the enemy was behind me. For the time being I
was not so much afraid of what would happen tomorrow as of the horrible certainty that my way, from now
on, would lead farther and farther downhill into darkness. I felt acutely that new offenses were bound to grow
out of this one offense, that my presence among my sisters, greeting and kissing my parents, were a lie, that I
was living a lie concealed deep inside myself. For a moment, hope and confidence flickered up inside me as I
gazed at my father's hat. I would tell him everything, would accept his verdict and his punishment, and would
make him into my confessor and savior. It would only be a penance, the kind I had often done, a bitterly
difficult hour, a ruefully difficult request for forgiveness. How sweet and tempting that sounded! But it was
no use. I knew I wouldn't do it. I knew I now had a secret, a sin which I would have to expiate alone. Perhaps I
stood at the parting of the ways, perhaps I would now belong among the wicked forever, share their secrets,
depend on them, obey them, have to become one of their kind. I had acted the man and hero, now I had to bear
the consequences. I was glad when my father took me to task for my muddy boots. It diverted his attention by
sidestepping the real issue and placed me in a position to endure reproaches that I could secretly transfer to the
other, the more serious offense. A strange new feeling overcame me at this point, a feeling that stung
pleasurably: I felt superior to my father! Momentarily I felt a certain loathing for his ignorance. His upbraiding
me for muddy boots seemed pitiful. "If you only knew" crossed my mind as I stood there like a criminal being
cross-examined for a stolen loaf of bread when the actual crime was murder. It was an odious, hostile feeling,
but it was strong and deeply attractive, and shackled me more than anything else to my secret and my guilt. I
thought Kromer might have gone to the police by now and denounced me, that thunderstorms were forming
above my head, while all this time they continued to treat me like a little child. This moment was the most
significant and lasting of the whole experience. It was the first rent in the holy image of my father, it was the
first fissure in the columns that had upheld my childhood, which every individual must destroy before he can
become himself. The inner, the essential line of our fate consists of such invisible experiences. Such fissures
and rents grow together again, heal and are forgotten, but in the most secret recesses they continue to live and
bleed. I immediately felt such dread of this new feeling that I could have fallen down before my father and
kissed his feet to ask forgiveness. But one cannot apologize for something fundamental, and a child feels and
knows this as well and as deeply as any sage. I felt the need to give some thought to my new situation, to
reflect about what I would do tomorrow. But I did not find the time. All evening I was busy getting used to the
changed atmosphere in our living room. Wall clock and table, Bible and mirror, bookcase and pictures on the
wall were leaving me behind; I was forced to observe with a chill in my heart how my world, my good, happy,
carefree life, was becoming a part of the past, was breaking away from me, and I was forced to feel how I was
being shackled and held fast with new roots to the outside, to the dark and alien world. For the first time in my
life I tasted death, and death tasted bitter, for death is birth, is fear and dread of some terrible renewal. I was
glad when I finally lay in my bed. Just before, as my last torment, I had had to endure evening prayers. We
had sung a hymn which was one of my favorites. I felt unable to join in and every note galled me. When my
father intoned the blessing--when he finished with "God be with us!" --something broke inside me and I was
rejected forever from this intimate circle. God's grace was with all of them, but it was no longer with me. Cold
and deeply exhausted, I had left them. When I had lain in bed awhile, enveloped by its warmth and safety, my
fearful heart turned back once more in confusion and hovered anxiously above what was now past. My mother
had said good night to me as always. I could still hear her steps resound in the other room; the candle glow
still illuminated the chink in the door. Now, I thought, now she'll come back once more, she has sensed
something, she will give me a kiss and ask, ask kindly with a promise in her voice, and then I'll weep, then the
lump in my throat will melt, then I will throw my arms around her, and then all will be well; I will be saved!
And even after the chink in the door had gone dark I continued to listen and was certain that it simply would
have to happen. Then I returned to my difficulties and looked my enemy in the eye. I could see him clearly,
one eye screwed up, his mouth twisted into a brutal smile, and while I eyed him, becoming more and more
convinced of the inevitable, he grew bigger and uglier and his evil eye lit up with a fiendish glint. He was right
next to me until I fell asleep, yet I didn't dream of him nor of what had happened that day. I dreamed instead
that my parents, my sisters, and I were drifting in a boat, surrounded by absolute peace and the glow of a
holiday. In the middle of the night I woke with the aftertaste of this happiness. I could still see my sisters'

white summer dresses shimmer in the sun as I fell out of paradise back into reality, again face to face with the
enemy, with his evil eye. Next morning, when my mother came rushing up shouting that it was late and why
was I still in bed, I looked sick. When she asked me whether anything was wrong, I vomited. This seemed to
be something gained. I loved being slightly sick, being allowed to lie in bed all morning, drinking camomile
tea, listening to my mother tidy up the other rooms or Lina deal with the butcher in the hallway. Mornings off
from school seemed enchanted, like a fairy tale; the sun playing in the room was not the same sun shut out of
school when the green shades were lowered. Yet even this gave me no pleasure today; there was something
false about it. If only I could die! But, as often before, I was only slightly unwell and it was of no help, my
illness protected me from school but not from Franz Kromer who would be waiting for me at eleven in the
market place. And my mother's friendliness, instead of comforting me, was a distressing nuisance. I made a
show of having fallen asleep again in order to be left alone to think. But I could see no way out. At eleven I
had to be at the market. At ten I quietly got dressed and said that I felt better. The answer, as usual under these
circumstances, was: either I went straight back to bed or in the afternoon I would have to be in school. I said I
would gladly go to school. I had come up with a plan. I couldn't meet Kromer penniless. I had to get hold of
my piggy bank. I knew it didn't contain enough, by no means enough, yet it was something, and I sensed that
something was better than nothing, and that Kromer could at least be appeased. In stocking feet I crept
guiltily into my mother's room and took the piggy bank out of her desk; yet that was not half as bad as what
had happened the day before with Kromer. My heart beat so rapidly I felt I would choke. It did not ease up
when I discovered downstairs that the bank was locked. Forcing it was easy, it was merely a matter of tearing
the thin tin-plate grid; yet breaking it hurt--only now had I really committed a theft. Until then I had filched
lumps of sugar or some fruit; this was more serious stealing, even though it was my own money I stole. I
sensed how I was one step nearer Kromer and his world, how bit by bit everything was going downhill with
me. I began to feel stubborn; let the devil take the hindmost! There was no turning back now. Nervously I
counted the money. In the piggy bank it had sounded like so much more, but there was painfully little lying in
my hand: sixty-five pfennigs. I hid the box on the ground floor, held the money clasped in my fist, and stepped
out of the house, feeling more different than I had ever felt before when I walked through the gate. I thought I
heard someone calling after me from upstairs but I walked away quickly. There was still a lot of time left. By
a very devious route, I sneaked through the little alleys of a changed town, under a cloudy sky such as I had
never seen before, past staring houses and people who eyed me with suspicion. Then it occurred to me that a
friend from school had once found a thaler in the cattle market. I would gladly have gone down on my knees
and prayed that God perform a miracle and let me make a similar find. But I had forfeited the right to pray.
And in any case, mending the box would have required a second miracle. Franz Kromer spotted me from a
distance, yet he approached me without haste and seemed to ignore me. When he was close, he motioned
authoritatively for me to follow him, and without once turning back he walked calmly down the Strohgasse
and across the little footbridge until he stopped in front of a new building at the outskirts. There were no
workmen about, the walls were bare, doors and windows were blanks. Kromer took a look around, then
walked through the entrance into the house and I followed him. He stepped behind a wall, gave me a signal,
and stretched out his hand. "Have you got it?" he asked coolly. I drew my clenched fist out of my pocket and
emptied my money into his flat outstretched palm. He had counted it even before the last pfennig piece had
clinked down. "That's sixty-five pfennigs, " he said and looked at me. "Yes, " I said nervously. "That's all I
have. I know it's not enough, but it's all I have. " "I thought you were cleverer than that, " he scolded almost
mildly. "Among men of honor you've got to do things right. I don't want to take anything away from you that
isn't the right sum. You know that. Take your pennies back, there! The other one--you know who--won't try to
scale down the price. He pays up. " "But I simply don't have another pfennig. It's all I had in my bank. "
"That's your business. But I don't want to make you unhappy. You owe me one mark, thirty-five pfennigs.
When can I have them?" "Oh, you'll get them for sure, Kromer. I just don't know when right now--perhaps I'll
have more tomorrow or the day later. You understand, don't you, that I can't breathe a word about this to my
father. " "That's not my concern. I'm not out to do you any harm. I could have my money before lunch if I
wanted, you know, and I'm poor. You wear expensive clothes and you're better fed than I. But I won't say
anything. I can wait a bit. The day after tomorrow I'll whistle for you. You know what my whistle sounds like,
don't you?" He let me hear it. I had heard it before. "Yes, " I said, "I know it. " He left me as though he'd
never seen me before. It had been a business transaction between the two of us, nothing more. I think
Kromer's whistle would frighten me even today if I suddenly heard it again. From now on I was to hear it

repeatedly; it seemed to me I heard it all the time. There was not a single place, not a single game, no activity,
no thought which this whistle did not penetrate, the whistle that made me his slave, that had become my fate.
Frequently I would go into our small flower garden, of which I was so fond on those mild, colorful autumn
afternoons, and an odd urge prompted me to play once more the childish games of my earlier years; I was
playing, so to speak, the part of someone younger than myself, someone still good and free, innocent and safe.
Yet into the midst of this haven--always expected, yet horribly surprising each time--from somewhere
Kromer's whistle would erupt, destroying the game, crushing my illusions. Then I would have to leave the
garden to follow my tormentor to wicked, ugly places where I would have to give him an account of my pitiful
finances and let myself be pressed for payment. The entire episode lasted perhaps several weeks, yet to me
they seemed like years, an eternity. Rarely did I have any money, at most a five- or ten-pfennig piece stolen
from the kitchen table when Lina had left the shopping basket lying around. Kromer upbraided me each time,
becoming more and more contemptuous: I was cheating him, depriving him of what was rightfully his, I was
stealing from him, makinghim miserable! Never in my life had I felt so distressed, never had I felt more
hopeless, more enslaved. I had filled the piggy bank with play money and replaced it in my mother's desk. No
one asked for it but the possibility that they might never left my thoughts. What frightened me even more than
Kromer's brutal whistling was my mother's stepping up to me--wasn't she coming to inquire about the piggy
bank? Because I had met my tormentor many times empty-handed, he began finding other means of torturing
and using me. I had to work for him. He had to run various errands for his father; I had to do them for him. Or
he would ask me to perform some difficult feat: hop for ten minutes on one leg, pin a scrap of paper on a
passer-by's coat. Many nights in my dreams I elaborated on these tortures and lay drenched in a nightmare's
sweat. For a while I actually became sick. I vomited frequently and came down with frequent chills, yet at
night I would burn and sweat. My mother sensed that something was wrong and was very considerate, but this
only tortured me the more since I could not respond by confiding in her. One night, after I had gone to bed,
she brought me a piece of chocolate. It reminded me of former years when, if I had been a good boy, I would
receive such rewards before I fell asleep. Now she stood there and offered me the piece of chocolate. The sight
was so painful that I could only shake my head. She asked me what was wrong and stroked my hair. All I
could answer was: "No, no! I don't want anything. " She placed the chocolate on my night table and left. The
next morning, when she wanted to ask me about my behavior of the night before, I pretended to have forgotten
the episode completely. Once she brought the doctor, who examined me and prescribed cold baths in the
morning. My condition at that time was a kind of madness. Amid the ordered peace of our house I lived
shyly, in agony, like a ghost; I took no part in the life of the others, rarely forgot myself for an hour at a time.
To my father, who was often irritated and asked me what was the matter, I was completely cold.
2) Cain
My salvation came from a totally unexpected source, which, at the same time, brought a new element into my
life that has affected it to this very day. A new boy had just been enrolled in our school. He was the son of a
well-to-do widow who had come to live in our town; he wore a mourning band on his sleeve. Being several
years older than I, he was assigned to a grade above me. Still, I could not avoid noticing him, nor could
anyone else. This remarkable student seemed much older than he looked; in fact, he did not strike anyone as a
boy at all. In contrast to us, he seemed strange and mature, like a man, or rather like a gentleman. He was not
popular, did not take part in our games, still less in the general roughhouse, and only his firm, self-confident
tone toward the teachers won the admiration of the students. He was called Max Demian. One day--as
happened now and again--an additional class was assigned to our large classroom for some reason or other. It
was Demian's class. We, the younger ones, were having a Scripture lesson; the higher grade had to write an
essay. While the story of Cain and Abel was being drummed into us, I kept glancing toward Demian whose
face held a peculiar fascination for me, and I observed the intelligent, light, unusually resolute face bent
attentively and diligently over his work; he didn't at all look like a student doing an assignment, but rather like
a scientist investigating a problem of his own. I couldn't say that he made a favorable impression on me; on
the contrary, I had something against him: he seemed too superior and detached, his manner too provocatively
confident, and his eyes gave him an adult expression--which children never like--faintly sad, with flashes of
sarcasm. Yet I could not help looking at him, no matter whether I liked or detested him, but if he happened to
glance my way I averted my eyes in panic. When I think back on it today, and what he looked like as a student

at that time, I can only say that he was in every respect different from all the others, was entirely himself, with
a personality all his own which made him noticeable even though he did his best not to be noticed; his manner
and bearing was that of a prince disguised among farm boys, taking great pains to appear one of them. He was
walking behind me on the way home from school, and after the others had turned off he caught up with me
and said hello. Even his manner of greeting, though he tried to imitate our schoolboy tone, was distinctly adult
and polite. "Shall we walk together for a while?" he asked. I felt flattered and nodded. Then I described to
him where I lived. "Oh, over there?" he said and smiled. "I know the house. There's something odd above the
doorway--it interested me at once. " I didn't know offhand what he meant and was astonished that he
apparently knew our house better than I did myself. The keystone of the arch above the doorway bore no
doubt a kind of coat of arms but it had worn off with time and had frequently been painted over. As far as I
knew it had nothing to do with us and our family. "I don't know anything about it, " I said shyly. "It's a bird or
something like that and must be quite old. The house is supposed to have been part of the monastery at one
point. " "That's quite possible. " He nodded. "Take a good look at it sometime! Such tilings can be quite
interesting. I believe it's a sparrow hawk. " We walked on. I felt very self-conscious. Suddenly Demian
laughed as though something had struck him as funny. "Yes, when we had class together, " he burst out. "The
story of Cain who has that mark on his forehead. Do you like it?" No, I didn't. It was rare for me to like
anything we had to learn. Yet I didn't dare confess it, for I felt I was being addressed by an adult. I said I didn't
much mind the story Demian slapped me on the back. "You don't have to put on an act for me. But in fact the
story is quite remarkable. It's far more remarkable than most stories we're taught in school. Your teacher didn't
go into it at great lengths. He just mentioned the usual things about God and sin and so forth. But I believe --"
He interrupted himself and asked with a smile: "Does this interest you at all?" "Well, I think, " he went on,
"one can give this story about Cain quite a different interpretation. Most of the things we're taught I'm sure are
quite right and true, but one can view all of them from quite a different angle than the teachers do--and most of
the time they then make better sense. For instance, one can't be quite satisfied with this Cain and the mark on
his forehead, with the way it's explained to us. Don't you agree? It's perfectly possible for someone to kill his
brother with a stone and to panic and repent. But that he's awarded a special decoration for his cowardice, a
mark that protects him and puts the fear of God into all the others, that's quite odd, isn't it?" "Of course, " I
said with interest: the idea began to fascinate me. "But what other way of interpreting the story is there?" He
slapped me on the shoulder. "It's quite simple! The first element of the story, its actual beginning, was the
mark. Here was a man with something in his face that frightened the others. They didn't dare lay hands on
him; he impressed them, he and his children. We can guess--no, we can be quite certain--that it was not a mark
on his forehead like a postmark--life is hardly ever as clear and straightforward as that. It is much more likely
that he struck people as faintly sinister, perhaps a little more intellect and boldness in his look than people
were used to. This man was powerful: you would approach him only with awe. He had a 'sign. ' You could
explain this any way you wished. And people always want what is agreeable to them and puts them in the
right. They were afraid of Cain's children: they bore a 'sign. ' So they did not interpret the sign for what it
was--a mark of distinction--but as its opposite. They said: 'Those fellows with the sign, they're a strange
lot'--and indeed they were. People with courage and character always seem sinister to the rest. It was a scandal
that a breed of fearless and sinister people ran about freely, so they attached a nickname and myth to these
people to get even with them, to make up for the many times they had felt afraid--do you get it?" "Yes--that
is--in that case Cam wouldn't have been evil at all? And the whole story in the Bible is actually not authentic?"
"Yes and no. Such age-old stories are always true but they aren't always properly recorded and aren't always
given correct interpretations. In short, I mean Cain was a fine fellow and this story was pinned on him only
because people were afraid. The story was simply a rumor, something that people gab about, and it was true in
so far as Cain and his children really bore a kind of mark and were different from most people. " I was
astounded. "And do you believe that the business about killing his brother isn't true either?" I asked,
entranced. "Oh, that's certainly true. The strong man slew a weaker one. It's doubtful whether it was really his
brother, But it isn't important. Ultimately all men are brothers. So, a strong man slew a weaker one: perhaps it
was a truly valiant act, perhaps it wasn't. At any rate, all the other weaker ones were afraid of him from then
on, they complained bitterly and if you asked them: 'Why don't you turn around and slay him, too?' they did
not reply 'Because we're cowards, ' but rather 'You can't, he has a sign. God has marked him. ' The fraud must
have originated some way like that. --Oh well, I see I'm keeping you. So long then. " He turned into the
Altgasse and left me standing there, more baffled than I had ever been in my life. Yet, almost as soon as he

had gone, everything he had said seemed incredible. Cain a noble person, Abel a coward! Cain's mark a mark
of distinction! It was absurd, it was blasphemous and evil. How did God fit in in that case? Hadn't He accepted
the sacrifice of Abel? Didn't He love Abel? No, what Demian had said was completely crazy. And I suspected
that he had wanted to make fun of me and make me lose my footing. He was clever all right, and he could talk,
but he couldn't put that one over, not on me! I had never before given as much thought to a biblical story or to
any other story. And for a long time I had not forgotten Franz Kromer as completely; for hours, for a whole
evening in fact. At home I read the story once more as written in the Bible. It was brief and unambiguous; it
was quite mad to look for a special, hidden meaning. At that rate every murderer could declare that he was
God's darling! No, what Demian had said was nonsense. What pleased me was the ease and grace with which
he was able to say such things, as though everything were self-evident; and then the look in his eyes!
Something was very wrong with me, though; my life was in very great disorder. I had lived in a wholesome
and clean world, had been a kind of Abel myself, and now I was stuck deeply in the "other world, " had fallen
and sunk very low--yet it hadn't basically been my fault! How was I to consider that? And now a memory
flashed within me that for a moment almost left me breathless. On that fatal evening when my misery had
begun, there had been that matter with my father. There, for a moment, I had seen through him and his world
of light and wisdom and had felt nothing but contempt for it. Yes, at that moment I, who was Cain and bore
the mark, had imagined that this sign was not a mark of shame and that because of my evil and misfortune I
stood higher than my father and the pious, the righteous. I had not experienced the moment in this form, in
clearly expressed thoughts, but all of this had been contained within it; it had been the eruption of emotions, of
strange stirrings, that hurt me yet filled me with pride at the same time. When I considered how strangely
Demian had talked about the fearless and the cowardly, what an unusual meaning he had given the mark Cain
bore on his forehead, how his eyes, his remarkable adult eyes had lit up, the question flashed through my mind
whether Demian himself was not a kind of Cain. Why does he defend Cain unless he feels an affinity with
him? Why does he have such a powerful gaze? Why does he speak so contemptuously of the "others, " of the
timid who actually are the pious, the chosen ones of the Lord? I could not bring these thoughts to any
conclusion. A stone had been dropped into the well, the well was my youthful soul. And for a very long time
this matter of Cain, the fratricide, and the "mark" formed the point of departure for all my attempts at
comprehension, my doubts and my criticism. I noticed that Demian exerted equal fascination over the other
students. I hadn't told anyone about his version of the story of Cain, but the others seemed to be interested in
him, too. At any rate, many rumors were in circulation about the "new boy. " If I could only remember them
all now, each one would throw some light on him and could be interpreted. I remember first that Demian's
mother was reported to be wealthy and also, supposedly, neither she nor her son ever attended church. One
story had it that they were Jewish but they might equally well have been secret Mohammedans. Then there
was Max Demian's legendary physical prowess. But this could be corroborated: when the strongest boy in
Demian's class had taunted him, calling him a coward when he refused to fight back, Demian had humiliated
him. Those who were present told that Demian had grasped the boy with one hand by the neck and squeezed
until the boy went pale; afterwards, the boy had slunk away and had not been able to use his arm for a whole
week. One evening some boys even claimed that he was dead. For a time everything, even the most
extravagant assertions were believed. Then everyone seemed to have had their fill of Demian for a while,
though not much later gossip again flourished: some boys reported that Demian was intimate with girls and
that he "knew everything. " Meanwhile, my business with Kromer took its inevitable course. I couldn't escape
him, for even when he left me alone for days I was still bound to him. He haunted my dreams and what he
failed to perpetrate on me in real life, my imagination let him do to me in those dreams in which I was
completely his slave. I have always been a great dreamer; in dreams I am more active than in my real life, and
these shadows sapped me of health and energy. A recurring nightmare was that Kromer always maltreated me,
spit and knelt on me and, what was worse, led me on to commit the most horrible crimes--or, rather, not so
much led me on as compelled me through sheer force of persuasion. The worst of these dreams, from which I
awoke half-mad, had to do with a murderous assault on my father. Kromer whetted a knife, put it in my hand;
we stood behind some trees in an avenue and lay in wait for someone, I did not know whom. Yet when this
someone approached and Kromer pinched my arm to let me know that this was the person I was to stab--it was
my father. Then I would awake. Although I still drew a connection between these events and the story of Cain
and Abel, I gave little thought to Max Demian. When he first approached me again, it was, oddly enough, also
in a dream. For I was still dreaming of being tortured. Yet this time it was Demian who knelt on me. And--this

was totally new and left a deep impression on me--everything I had resisted and that had been agony to me
when Kromer was my tormentor I suffered gladly at Demian's hands, with a feeling compounded as much of
ecstasy as of fear. I had this dream twice. Then Kromer regained his old place. For years I have been unable
to distinguish between what I experienced in these dreams and in real life. In any event, the bad relationship
with Kromer continued and by no means came to an end after I had finally paid my debt out of any number of
petty thefts. No, for now he knew of these new thefts since he asked each time where I had gotten the money,
and I was more in bondage to him than ever. Often he threatened to tell everything to my father but even then
my fear was hardly as great as my profound regret at not having done so myself at the very beginning. In the
meantime, miserable though I was, I did not regret everything that happened, at least not all the time, and
occasionally I even felt that everything had had to happen as it did. I was in the hands of fate and it was
useless to try to escape. Presumably, my parents also were distressed by the state I was in. A strange spirit had
taken hold of me, I no longer fitted into our community, once so intimate; yet often a wild longing came over
me to return to it as to a lost paradise. My mother in particular treated me more like an invalid than a
scoundrel, but my true status within the family I was better able to judge from my sisters' attitude. Theirs was
one of extreme indulgence, which made it plain that I was considered a kind of madman, more to be pitied for
his condition than blamed, but possessed by the devil nonetheless. They prayed for me with unusual fervor
and I was infinitely miserable when I realized the futility of these prayers. Often I felt a burning need for
relief, for genuine confession, and yet sensed in advance that I would be unable to tell my mother or father,
and explain everything properly. I knew that everything I said would be accepted sympathetically, that they
would, yes, even feel sorry for me, but that they would not understand, that the whole thing would be regarded
as a momentary aberration, whereas in truth it was my fate. I realize that some people will not believe that a
child of little more than ten years is capable of having such feelings. My story is not intended for them. I am
telling it to those who have a better knowledge of man. The adult who has learned to translate a part of his
feelings into thoughts notices the absence of these thoughts in a child, and therefore comes to believe that the
child lacks these experiences, too. Yet rarely in my life have I felt and suffered as deeply as at that time. One
day it rained. Kromer had ordered me to meet him at the Burgplatz, and there I stood and waited, shuffling
among the wet chestnut leaves that were still falling from the black wet trees. I had no money with me but I
had managed to put aside two pieces of cake and had brought them along so as to be able to give Kromer
something at least. By now I was used to standing in some corner and waiting for him, often for a very long
time, and I accepted it the same way one learns to put up with the inevitable. Kromer showed up finally. He
didn't stay long. He poked me in the ribs a few times, laughed, took the cake, even offered me a damp
cigarette (which, however, I did not accept), and was friendlier than usual. "Yes, " he said nonchalantly before
going away, "before I forget it, you might bring your sister along the next time, the older one, what's her name.
" I failed to get his point and made no reply. I only looked at him, surprised. "Don't you understand? You're
to bring your sister. " "No, Kromer, that's impossible. I wouldn't be allowed to and she wouldn't come in any
case. " I was prepared for this new ruse or pretext of his. He did this often: demanded something impossible,
frightened and humiliated me, then gradually offered some bargain as a way out, and I had to buy myself off
with some money or a gift. This time, however, it was altogether different. My refusal did not seem to make
him angry at all. "Well, anyway, " he said in a matter-of-fact tone, "think it over. I'd like to meet your sister.
We'll find a way one of these days. You could simply take her along on a walk and then I could join you. I'll
give you a whistle tomorrow, then we can talk about it some more. " After he had left, something of the
nature of his request suddenly dawned on me. I was still quite ignorant in these matters but I knew from
hearsay that boys and girls when they grew older were able to do certain mysterious, repulsive, forbidden
things together. And now I was supposed to--it suddenly flashed on me how monstrous his request was! I
knew at once that I would never do it. But what would happen then? What revenge would Kromer take on me?
I didn't dare think of it. This was the beginning of a new torture for me. Inconsolable, I walked across the
desolate square, hands in my pockets. Further and greater agonies awaited me! Suddenly a vigorous cheerful
voice called me. I was startled and began to flee. Someone ran after me, a hand grasped me gently from
behind. It was Max Demian. "Oh, it's you, " I said mistrustfully. "You gave me a terrible shock. " He looked
down at me and never had his look been more adult, superior, the look of someone who could see through me.
We had not spoken to each other for a long time. "I feel sorry for you, " he said in his polite yet decisive
manner. "Listen, you can't let yourself be frightened like that. " "Well, one can't always help it. " "So it
seems. But look: if you practically go to pieces in front of someone who hasn't done you any harm, then that

someone begins to think. He's surprised, he becomes inquisitive, he thinks you're remarkably high-strung and
reaches the conclusion that people are always like that when they're deathly afraid. Cowards are constantly
afraid, but you're not a coward, are you? Certainly, you're no hero either. There are some things you're afraid
of, and some people, too. And that should never be, you should never be afraid of men. You aren't afraid of
me? Or are you?" "Oh, no, not at all. " "Exactly. But there are people you are frightened of?" "I don't know...
Why don't you let me be?" He kept pace with me--I had quickened my steps with thoughts of escaping--and I
felt him glancing at me from the side. "Let's assume, " he began again, "that I don't mean to do you any harm.
At any rate, you've no need to be afraid of me. I'd like to try out an experiment on you. It might be fun and you
might even learn something from it. Now pay attention!--You see, I sometimes practice an art known as
thought reading. There's no black magic about it but if you don't know how it's done it can seem very uncanny.
You can shock people with it, too. Now let's give it a try. Well, I like you, or I'm interested in you and would
like to discover what goes on inside you. I've already taken the initial step in that direction: I've frightened
you--so that you're nervous. There must be things and people that you're afraid of. If you are afraid of
someone, the most likely reason is that this someone has something on you. For example, you've done
something wrong and the other person knows it--he has a hold on you. You get it? Very clear, isn't it?" I
looked up helplessly at his face, which was as serious and intelligent as ever, and kind. Yet its detached
severity lacked tenderness; impartiality or something similar was visible in it. I was hardly aware of what was
happening to me: he stood before me like a magician. "Have you got it?" he asked once more. I nodded,
unable to speak. "I told you, reading other people's thoughts seems strange but it's perfectly natural. For
instance, I could tell you almost exactly what you thought about me the time I told you the story of Cain and
Abel. Well, this isn't the time to talk of that. I also think it possible that you dreamed about me once. But let's
put that aside, too. You're bright and most people are stupid. I like talking to a bright fellow now and then,
someone I can trust. You don't mind, do you?" "Of course not. But I don't understand... " "Let's keep to our
amusing experiment for the moment. So, we've discovered that boy S is easily frightened--he's afraid of
someone--he probably shares a secret with this other person, a secret that makes him feel uneasy. Roughly
speaking, does this correspond to the facts?" As though in a dream, I succumbed to his voice and influence.
His voice seemed to come from within myself. And it knew everything. Did it know everything more clearly
and better than I did myself? Demian slapped me firmly on the shoulder. "So that's what it is. I thought it
might be. Now just one more question: do you happen to know the name of the boy who left you back there at
the Burgplatz?" I was terrified. He had touched my secret. "What boy? There wasn't any boy there, only me.
" "Go on. " He laughed. "What's his name?" "Do you mean Franz Kromer?" I whispered. He gave me a
satisfied nod. "Excellent. You're all right, we'll become friends yet. But first I have to tell you something: this
Kromer, or whatever his name is, his face tells me he's a first-rate bastard. What do you think?" "Yes, " I
sighed, "he's pretty bad. But he mustn't hear about this. For God's sake. He mustn't find out anything. Do you
know him? Does he know you?" "Relax. He's gone and he doesn't know me not yet. But I'd like to meet him.
He goes to public school, doesn't he?" "Yes. " "What grade's he in?" "The fifth. But don't say anything to
him. Please. " "Don't worry, nothing will happen to you. I take it you don't want to tell me more about this
Kromer?" "I can't. " He was silent for a while. "Too bad, " he said. "We could have carried the experiment a
stage further. But I don't want to get you all upset. However, you realize, don't you, that your fear of him is all
wrong? Such fear can destroy us completely. You've got to get rid of it, you've simply got to, if you want to
turn into someone decent. You understand that, don't you?" "Certainly, you're completely right... But it's so
complicated... You've no idea... " "You've seen that I know quite a few things about you, far more than you
would have imagined. Do you owe him any money?" "Yes, that too. But that's not the main thing. I can't tell
you, I just can't. " "Wouldn't it help if I gave you as much as you owe him?" "No, that's not it. And you
promise not to tell anyone about it? Not a word?" "You can trust me, Sinclair. You can tell me your secret
some other time. " "Never!" I shouted. "As you like. All I meant was: perhaps you'll tell me more some other
time. Voluntarily, of course. You don't think I would treat you the way Kromer does, do you?" "Oh, no--but
what do you know about that anyhow?" "Nothing whatever. I've merely thought it over and I'd never do it
Kromer's way, you can believe that. Besides, you don't owe me anything. " We did not speak for a long time,
and I began to calm down, yet I found Demian's knowledge all the more puzzling. "I'm going home now, " he
said and gathered his coat closer around him in the rain. "There's just one more thing I'd like to say to you
since we've gotten so far--you ought to get rid of this bastard! If there's no other way of doing it, kill him. It
would impress and please me if you did! I'd even lend you a hand. " The story of Cain suddenly recurred to

me, and I became afraid again. Everything began to seem so ominous to me that I began to whimper. I was
surrounded by too much that I didn't understand. "All right. " Max Demian smiled. "Go on home. We'll find a
way, even though killing him would be the simplest. In cases like this, the simplest course is always the best.
Your friend Kromer isn't the best friend to have. " I found my way home and it seemed to me that I had been
away for a year. Everything looked different. Something like a future, like hope, now separated me from
Kromer. I was no longer alone. Only now did I realise how horribly alone I had been with my secret for weeks
on end. And at once I remembered a thought I had had several times before: that a confession to my parents
would lighten my load but would not entirely relieve me of it. Now I had almost confessed, to another, to a
stranger, and the sense of relief was like a fresh breeze. Nonetheless, my fear was far from conquered and I
was prepared for a long series of terrible wrangles with my enemy. That was why it seemed remarkable that
matters took such a calm, such a discreet course. For one day, for two, for a whole week there was no sound
of Kromer's whistle near our house. I hardly dared believe it and I constantly lay in wait for the moment when
suddenly, when least expected, he would reappear. He seemed to have vanished. Mistrusting my new freedom,
I refused to believe in it, that is, until I finally ran into Franz Kromer. When he saw me he flinched, his face
twitched, and he turned away so as to avoid meeting me. It was an unprecedented moment for me! My enemy
fleeing from me, my devil afraid of me! A thrill of happy surprise overwhelmed me. One day I ran into
Demian again. He was waiting for me in front of school. "Hello, " I said. "Good morning, Sinclair. I only
wanted to hear how things were going. Kromer isn't bothering you any more, is he?" "Is that your doing?
How did you manage it? I don't understand it at all. He's staying away altogether. " "That's good. If he should
turn up again--I don't think he will, but he's quite ruthless--just tell him not to forget Max Demian. " "But
what's the connection? Did you pick a fight and beat him up?" "No, that's not my way of doing things. I
merely talked to him as I did to you and was able to make it clear to him that it is to his advantage to leave you
alone. " "You didn't pay him any money, I hope. " "No, that's your method. " He evaded all my questions,
leaving me with the same uneasy feeling toward him I'd had before: a strange mixture of gratitude and awe,
admiration and fear, sympathy and inward resistance. I decided to seek him out and talk at length about all
these matters, as well as about the Cain business. But it did not happen that way. Gratitude is not a virtue I
believe in, and to me it seems hypocritical to expect it from a child. Thus my total ingratitude toward Max
Demian does not astonish me too much. Today I have no doubt whatever that I would have been sick and
ruined for life had he not freed me from Kromer's clutches. Even at that time I was conscious that this
liberation was the greatest experience of my life--but the liberator himself I deserted as soon as he had
performed his miracle. As I have said, ingratitude does not surprise me. What does startle me, in retrospect, is
my lack of curiosity. How was I able to go on living a single day without trying to come nearer to the secret
which Demian had revealed to me? How was it I did not want to hear more about Cain, more about Kromer,
more about Demian's ability to read other peopled thoughts? It is almost incredible, and yet it was so. I
suddenly found myself extricated from a demonic labyrinth. I again saw the world bright and joyful before me
and no longer succumbed to fits of suffocating fear. The spell was broken, I was no longer damned and
tormented. I was a schoolboy again, and my whole being sought to regain its peaceful equilibrium as quickly
as possible, making a particular effort to repel and forget the ugly, threatening things I had come to know. The
whole episode of my guilt and fright slipped from my memory with incredible speed and without apparently
leaving any scars or deep impressions behind. However, today I can understand why I strained to forget my
savior so quickly. I fled from the valley of sorrow, my horrible bondage to Kromer, with all the strength at the
command of my injured soul: back to where I had been happy and content, back to the lost paradise that was
opening up again now, back to the light, untroubled world of mother and father, my sisters, the smell of
cleanliness, and the piety of Abel. Already, the day after my short talk with Demian, when I was fully
convinced at last of having regained my freedom and no longer feared losing it again, I did what I had wanted
to do so often and desperately before--I confessed. I went to my mother, I showed her the damaged piggy bank
filled with play money and I told her for how long I had bound myself through my own guilt to an evil
tonnenter. She did not understand everything but she saw; she saw my changed expression, heard the change
in my tone of voice, and felt that I was cured and had been restored to her. And now began the feast of my
readmittance to the fold, the return of the Prodigal Son. Mother took me to my father, the story was repeated,
there were questions and exclamations of surprise, both parents stroked my head and breathed sighs of relief
after the long period of oppression. Everything was marvelous, everything happened as the stories I had read
said they would, everything resolved itself in wonderful harmony. I drugged myself on the satisfaction of

having regained my peace of mind and the confidence of my parents, I became a most exemplary boy at home,
played more than ever with my sisters and during the devotional periods sang all my favorite hymns with the
fervor of one who has been saved, who has been converted. It came from my heart, there was nothing false
about it. Still, not everything was back in order. And this is the fact that really accounts for my neglect of
Demian. I should have confessed tohim. The confession would have been less emotional and touching, but it
would have been far more fruitful. I had returned to my former, my Edenic world. This was not Demian's
world, and he would never have been able to fit into it. He too--though differently from Kromer--was a
tempter; he, too, was a link to the second, the evil world with which I no longer wanted to have anything to do.
I did not want to sacrifice Abel to glorify Cain, not just now when I had once more become Abel. Those were
the superficial reasons. The inner ones, however, were as follows: I was free of Kromer and the devil's hands
but through no power or effort of my own. I had tried to pass through the labyrinth of the world but the way
had proved too intricate for me. Now that a friendly hand had extricated me, I retreated, looking neither to the
left nor to the right, but went straight to my mother's lap and the security of a pious, sheltered childhood. I
turned myself into someone younger, more dependent, more childish than I was. I had to replace my
dependence on Kromer with a new one, for I was unable to walk alone. So, in the blindness of my heart, I
chose to be dependent on my father and mother, on the old, cherished "world of light, " though I knew by now
that it was not the only one. If I had not followed this course I would have had to bank on Demian and entrust
myself to him. That I did not do so at the time seemed to me to be the result of my justifiable suspicion of his
strange ideas; in reality it was entirely because of my fear. For Demian would have been far more exacting
than my parents; he would have tried to make me more independent by using persuasion, exhortation,
mockery, and sarcasm. I realize today that nothing in the world is more distasteful to a man than to take the
path that leads to himself. Yet six months later I could not resist the temptation and I asked my father during a
walk what one was to make of the fact that some people considered Cain a better person than Abel. He was
much taken aback and explained that this was an interpretation entirely lacking in originality, that it had
already arisen in Old Testament times and had been taught by a number of sects, one of which were called the
"Cainites. " But of course this mad doctrine was merely an attempt on the part of the devil to destroy our faith,
for, if one believed that Cain was right and Abel in the wrong, then it followed that God had made a mistake;
in other words, the God of the Bible was not the right and only one, but a false God. Indeed, the Cainites had
taught and preached something of the sort. However, this heresy had long since disappeared from the face of
the earth and he was only surprised that a school friend of mine should have heard anything about it. He
warned me most seriously against harboring such ideas.
3) Among Thieves
If I wanted to, I could recall many delicate moments from my childhood: the sense of being protected that my
parents gave me, my affectionate nature, simply living a playful, satisfied existence in gentle surroundings.
But my interest centers on the steps that I took to reach myself. All the moments of calm, the islands of peace
whose magic I felt, I leave behind in the enchanted distance. Nor do I ask to ever set foot there again. That is
why--as long as I dwell on my childhood--I will emphasize the things that entered it from outside, that were
new, that impelled me forward or tore me away. These impulses always came from the "other world" and were
accompanied by fear, constraint, and a bad conscience. They were always revolutionary and threatened the
calm in which I would gladly have continued to live. Then came those years in which I was forced to
recognize the existence of a drive within me that had to make itself small and hide from the world of light. The
slowly awakening sense of my own sexuality overcame me, as it does every person, like an enemy and
terrorist, as something forbidden, tempting and sinful. What my curiosity sought, what dreams, lust and fear
created--the great secret of puberty--did not fit at all into my sheltered childhood. I behaved like everyone else.
I led the double life of a child who is no longer a child. My conscious self lived within the familiar and
sanctioned world, it denied the new world that dawned within me. Side by side with this I lived in a world of
dreams, drives, and desires of a chthonic nature, across which my conscious self desperately built its fragile
bridges, for the childhood world within me was falling apart. Like most parents, mine were no help with the
new problems of puberty, to which no reference was ever made. All they did was take endless trouble in
supporting my hopeless attempts to deny reality and to continue dwelling in a childhood world that was
becoming more and more unreal. I have no idea whether parents can be of help, and I do not blame mine. It

was my own affair to come to terms with myself and to find my own way, and like most well-brought-up
children, I managed it badly. Everyone goes through this crisis. For the average person this is the point when
the demands of his own life come into the sharpest conflict with his environment, when the way forward has
to be sought with the bitterest means at his command. Many people experience the dying and rebirth--which is
our fate--only this once during their entire life. Their childhood becomes hollow and gradually collapses,
everything they love abandons them and they suddenly feel surrounded by the loneliness and mortal cold of
the universe. Very many are caught forever in this impasse, and for the rest of their lives cling painfully to an
irrevocable past, the dream of the lost paradise--which is the worst and most ruthless of dreams. But let me
return to my story. The sensations and dream images announcing the end of my childhood are too many to be
related in full. The important thing was that the "dark world, " the "other world, " had reappeared. What Franz
Kromer had once been was now part of myself. Several years had gone by since the episode with Kromer.
That dramatic time filled with guilt lay far in the past and seemed like a brief nightmare that had quickly
vanished. Franz Kromer had long since gone out of my life, I hardly noticed when I happened to meet him in
the street. The other important figure in my little tragedy, Max Demian, was never to go out of my life again
entirely. Yet for a long time he merely stood at its distant fringes, visible but out of effective range. Only
gradually did he come closer, again radiating strength and influence. I am trying to see what I can remember
of Demian at that time. It is quite possible that I didn't talk to him once for a whole year or even longer. I
avoided him and he did not impose himself on me in any way. The few instances that we met, he merely
nodded to me. Sometimes it even seemed as though his friendliness was faintly tinged with derision or with
ironic reproach--but I may have imagined this. The experience that we had shared and the strange influence he
had exerted on me at that time were seemingly forgotten by both of us. I can conjure up what he looked like
and now that I begin to recollect, I can see that he was not so far away from me after all and that I did notice
him. I can see him on his way to school, alone or with a group of older students, and I see him strange, lonely,
and silent, wandering among them like a separate planet, surrounded by an aura all his own, a law unto
himself. No one liked him, no one was on intimate terms with him, except his mother, and this relationship,
too, seemed not that of a child but of an adult. When they could, the teachers left him to himself; he was a
good student but took no particular trouble to please anyone. Now and again we heard of some word, some
sarcastic comment or retort he was rumored to have made to a teacher, and which--as gems of provocation and
cutting irony--left little to be desired. As I close my eyes to recollect I can see his image rise up: where was
that? Yes, I have it now: in the little alley before our house. One day I saw him standing there, notebook in
hand, sketching. He was drawing the old coat of arms with the bird above our entrance. As I stood at the
window behind the curtain and watched him, I was deeply astonished by his perceptive, cool, light-skinned
face that was turned toward the coat of arms, the face of a man, of a scientist or artist, superior and purposeful,
strangely lucid and calm, and with knowing eyes. And I can see him on another occasion. It was a few weeks
later, also in a street. All of us on our way home from school were standing about a fallen horse. It lay in front
of a farmer's cart still harnessed to the shaft, snorting pitifully with dilated nostrils and bleeding from a hidden
wound so the white dust on one side of the street was stained. As I turned away nauseous I beheld Demian's
face. He had not thrust himself forward but was standing farthest back, at ease and as elegantly dressed as
usual. His eyes seemed fixed on the horse's head and again showed that deep, quiet, almost fanatical yet
dispassionate absorption. I could not help looking at him for a time and it was then that I felt a very remote
and peculiar sensation. I saw Demian's face and I not only noticed that it was not a boy's face but a man's; I
also felt or saw that it was not entirely the face of a man either, but had something feminine about it, too. Yet
the face struck me at that moment as neither masculine nor childlike, neither old nor young, but somehow a
thousand years old, somehow timeless, bearing the scars of an entirely different history than we knew; animals
could look like that, or trees, or planets--none of this did I know consciously, I did not feel precisely what I
say about it now as an adult, only something of the kind. Perhaps he was handsome, perhaps I liked him,
perhaps I also found him repulsive, I could not be sure of that either. All I saw was that he was different from
us, he was like an animal or like a spirit or like a picture, he was different, unimaginably different from the
rest of us. My memory fails me and I cannot be sure whether what I have described has not to some extent
been drawn from later impressions. Only several years later did I again come into closer contact with him.
Demian had not been confirmed in church with his own age group as was the custom, and this again made him
the object of wild rumors. Boys in school repeated the old story about his being Jewish, or more likely a
heathen, and others were convinced that both he and his mother were atheists or belonged to some fabulous

and disreputable sect. In connection with this I also remember having heard him suspected of being his
mother's lover. Most probably he had been brought up without any religious instruction whatever, but now this
seemed to be in some way ominous for his future. At rate, his mother decided to let him take Confirmation
lessons after all, though two years later than his age group. So it came about that he went to the same
Confirmation class as I did. For a time I avoided him entirely. I wanted no part of him; he was surrounded by
too many legends and secrets, but what bothered me most was a feeling of being indebted to him that had not
left me since the Kromer affair. I now had enough trouble with secrets of my own, for the Confirmation
lessons coincided with my decisive enlightenment about sex, and despite all good intentions, my interest in
religious matters was greatly diminished. What the pastor discussed lay far away in a very holy but unreal
world of its own; these things were no doubt quite beautiful and precious, but they were by no means as timely
and exciting as the new things I was thinking about. The more indifferent this condition made me to the
Confirmation lessons, the more I again became preoccupied with Max Demian. There seemed to be a bond
between us, a bond that I shall have to trace as closely as possible. As far as I can remember, it began early
one morning while the light still had to be turned on in our classroom. Our scripture teacher, a pastor, had
embarked on the story of Cain and Abel. I was sleepy and listened with only half an ear. When the pastor
began to hold forth loudly and urgently about Cain's mark I felt almost a physical touch, a warning, and
looking up I saw Max Demian's face half turned round toward me from one of the front rows, with a gleaming
eye that might express scorn as much as deep thought, you could not be sure. He looked at me for only a
moment and suddenly I listened tensely to the pastor's words, heard him speak about Cain and his mark, and
deep within me I felt the knowledge that it was not as he was teaching it, that one could look at it differently,
that his view was not above criticism. This one minute reestablished the link between me and Demian. And
how strange--hardly was I aware of a certain spiritual affinity, when I saw it translated into physical closeness.
I had no idea whether he was able to arrange it this way himself or whether it happened only by chance--I still
believed firmly in chance at that time--but after a few days Demian suddenly switched seats in Confirmation
class and came to sit in front of me (I can still recall it precisely: in the miserable poorhouse air of the
overcrowded classroom I loved the scent of fresh soap emanating from his nape) and after a few days he had
again changed seats and now sat next to me. There he stayed all winter and spring. The morning hours had
changed completely. They no longer put me to sleep or bored me. I actually looked forward to them.
Sometimes both of us listened to the pastor with the utmost concentration and a glance from my neighbor
could draw my attention to a remarkable story, an unusual saying. A further glance from him, a special one,
could make me critical or doubtful. Yet all too frequently we paid no attention. Demian was never rude to the
teacher or to his fellow students. I never saw him indulge in the usual pranks, not once did I hear him guffaw
or gossip during class, and he never incurred a teacher's reprimand. But very quietly, and more with signs and
glances than whispering, he contrived to let me share in his activities, and these sometimes were strange. For
instance, he would tell me which of the students interested him and how he studied them. About some of them
he had very precise knowledge. He would tell me before class: "When I signal with my thumb So-and-so will
turn round and look at us, or will scratch his neck. " During the period, when it had almost completely slipped
my mind, Max would suddenly make a significant gesture with his thumb. I would glance quickly at the
student indicated and each time I saw him perform the desired movement like a puppet on a string. I begged
Max to try this out on the pastor but he refused. Only once, when I came to class unprepared and told him that
I hoped the pastor would not call on me that day, he helped me. The pastor looked for a student to recite an
assigned catechism passage and his eyes sweeping through the room came to rest on my guilty face. Slowly he
approached me, his finger pointing at me, my name beginning to form on his lips--when suddenly he became
distracted or uneasy, pulled at his shut collar, stepped up to Demian, who was looking him directly in the eye
and seemed to want to ask him something. But he turned away again, cleared his throat a few times, and then
called on someone else. Even though these tricks amused me, I began to notice gradually that my friend
frequently played the same game with me. It would happen on my way to school that I would suddenly feel
Demian walking not far behind me and when I turned around he was there in fact. "Can you actually make
someone think what you want him to?" I asked him. He answered readily in his quiet, factual, and adult
manner. "No, " he said, "I can't do that. You see, we don't have free will even though the pastor makes believe
we do. A person can neither think what he wants to nor can I make him think what I want to. However, one
can study someone very closely and then one can often know almost exactly what he thinks or feels and then
one can also anticipate what he will do the next moment. It's simple enough, only people don't know it. Of

course you need practice. For example, there is a species of butterfly, a night-moth, in which the females are
much less common than the males. The moths breed exactly like all animals, the male fertilizes the female and
the female lays the eggs. Now, if you take a female night-moth--many naturalists have tried this
experiment--the male moths will visit this female at night, and they will come from hours away. From hours
away! Just think! From a distance of several miles all these males sense the only female in the region. One
looks for an explanation for this phenomenon but it is not easy. You must assume that they have a sense of
smell of some sort like a hunting dog that can pick up and follow a seemingly inperceptible scent. Do you see?
Nature abounds with such inexplicable things. But my argument is: if the female moths were as abundant as
the males, the latter would not have such a highly developed sense of smell. They've acquired it only because
they had to train themselves to have it. If a person were to concentrate all his will power on a certain end, then
he would achieve it. That's all. And that also answers your question. Examine a person closely enough and you
know more about him than he does himself. " It was on the tip of my tongue to mention "thought reading" and
to remind him of the scene with Kromer that lay so far in the past. But this, too, was strange about our
relationship: neither he nor I ever alluded to the fact that several years before he had intruded so seriously into
my life. It was as though nothing had ever been between us or as though each of us banked on it that the other
had forgotten. On one or two occasions it even happened that we caught sight of Kromer somewhere in the
street. Yet we neither glanced at each other nor said a word about him. "What is all this about the will?" I
asked. "On the one hand, you say our will isn't free. Then again you say we only need to concentrate our will
firmly on some end in order to achieve it. It doesn't make sense. If I'm not master of my own will, then I'm in
no position to direct it as I please. " He patted me on the back as he always did when he was pleased with me.
"Good that you ask, " he said, laughing. "You should always ask, always have doubts. But the matter is very
simple. If, for example, a night-moth were to concentrate its will on flying to a star or on some equally
unattainable object, it wouldn't succeed. Only--it wouldn't even try in the first place. A moth confines its
search to what has sense and value for it, on what it needs, what is indispensable to its life. And that's how a
moth achieves the incredible--it develops a magic sixth sense, which no other creature has. We have a wider
scope, greater variety of choice, and wider interests than an animal. But we, too, are confined to a relatively
narrow compass which we cannot break out of. If I imagined that I wanted under all circumstances to get to
the North Pole, to achieve it I would have to desire it strongly enough so that my whole being was ruled by it.
Once that is the case, once you have tried something that you have been ordered to do from within yourself,
then you'll be able to accomplish it, then you can harness your will to it like an obedient nag. But if I were to
decide to will that the pastor should stop wearing his glasses, it would be useless. That would be making a
game of it. But at that time in the fall when I was resolved to move away from my seat in the front row, it
wasn't difficult at all. Suddenly there was someone whose name preceded mine in the alphabet and who had
been away sick until then and since someone had to make room for him it was me of course because my will
was ready to seize the opportunity at once. " "Yes, " I said. "I too felt odd at that time. From the moment that
we began to take an interest in each other you moved closer and closer to me. But how did that happen? You
did not sit next to me right away, first you sat for a while in the bench in front of me. How did you manage to
switch once more?" "It was like this: I didn't know myself exactly where I wanted to sit but I wanted to shift
from my seat in the front row. I only knew that I wanted to sit farther to the back. It was my will to come to sit
next to you but I hadn't become conscious of it as yet. At the same time your will accorded with mine and
helped me. Only when I found myself sitting in front of you did I realize that my wish was only half fulfilled
and that my sole aim was to sit next to you. " "But at that time no one fell ill, no one who had been ill
returned, no new student joined the class. " "You're right. But at the time I simply did as I liked and sat down
next to you. The boy with whom I changed seats was somewhat surprised but he let me do as I pleased. The
pastor, too, once noticed that some sort of change had occurred. Even now something bothers him secretly
every time he has to deal with me, for he knows that my name is Demian and that something must be wrong if
I, a D, sit way in back in the S's. But that never penetrates his awareness because my will opposes it and
because I continuously place obstacles in his path. He keeps noticing that there's something wrong, then he
looks at me and tries to puzzle it out. But I have a simple solution to that. Every time his eyes meet mine I
stare him down. Very few people can stand that for long. All of them become uneasy. If you want something
from someone and you look him firmly in both eyes and he doesn't become ill at ease, give up. You don't have
a chance, ever! But that is very rare. I actually know only one person where it doesn't help me. " "Who is
that?" I asked quickly. He looked at me with narrowed eyes, as he did when he became thoughtful. Then he

looked away and made no reply. Even though I was terribly curious I could not repeat the question. I believe
he meant his mother. He was said to have a very close relationship with her, yet he never mentioned her name
and never took me home with him. I hardly knew what his mother looked like. Sometimes I attempted to
imitate Demian and fix my will with such concentration on something that I was certain to achieve it. There
were wishes that seemed urgent enough to me. But nothing happened; it didn't work. I could not bring myself
to talk to Demian about it. I wouldn't have been able to confess my wishes to him. And he didn't ask either.
Meantime cracks had begun to appear in my religious faith. Yet my thinking, which was certainly much
influenced by Demian, was very different from that of some of my fellow students who boasted complete
unbelief. On occasion they would say it was ridiculous, unworthy of a person to believe in God, that stories
like the Trinity and Virgin Birth were absurd, shameful. It was a scandal that we were still being fed such
nonsense in our time. I did not share these views. Even though I had my doubts about certain points, I knew
from my childhood the reality of a devout life, as my parents led it, and I knew also that this was neither
unworthy nor hypocritical. On the contrary, I still stood in the deepest awe of the religious. Demian, however,
had accustomed me to regard and interpret religious stories and dogma more freely, more individually, even
playfully, with more imagination; at any rate, I always subscribed with pleasure to the interpretations he
suggested. Some of it--the Cain business, for instance--was, of course, too much for me to stomach. And once
during Confirmation class he startled me with an opinion that was possibly even more daring. The teacher had
been speaking about Golgotha. The biblical account of the suffering and death of the Savior had made a deep
impression on me since my earliest childhood. Sometimes, as a little boy, on Good Friday, for instance, deeply
moved by my father's reading of the Passion to us, I would live in this sorrowful yet beautiful, ghostly, pale,
yet immensely alive world, in Gethsemane and on Golgotha, and when I heard Bach's St. Matthew Passion the
dark mighty glow of suffering in this mysterious world filled me with a mystical sense of trembling. Even
today I find in this music and in his Actus Tragicus the essence of all poetry. At the end of that class Demian
said to me thoughtfully: 'There's something I don't like about this story, Sinclair. Why don't you read it once
more and give it the acid test? There's something about it that doesn't taste right. I mean the business with the
two thieves. The three crosses standing next to each other on the hill are most impressive, to be sure. But now
comes this sentimental little treatise about the good thief. At first he was a thorough scoundrel, had committed
all those awful things and God knows what else, and now he dissolves in tears and celebrates such a tearful
feast of self-improvement and remorse! What's the sense of repenting if you're two steps from the grave? I ask
you. Once again it's nothing but a priest's fairy tale, saccharine and dishonest, touched up with sentimentality
and given a highly edifying background. If you had to pick a friend from between the two thieves or decide
which of the two you had rather trust, you most certainly wouldn't select that sniveling convert. No, the other
fellow, he's a man of character. He doesn't give a hoot for 'conversion, ' which to a man in his position can't be
anything but a pretty speech. He follows his destiny to its appointed end and does not turn coward and
forswear the devil, who has aided and abetted him until then. He has character, and people with character tend
to receive the short end of the stick in biblical stories. Perhaps he's even a descendant of Cain. Don't you
agree?" I was dismayed. Until now I had felt completely at home in the story of the Crucifixion. Now I saw
for the first time with how little individuality, with how little power of imagination I had listened to it and read
it. Still, Demian's new concept seemed vaguely sinister and threatened to topple beliefs on whose continued
existence I felt I simply had to insist. No, one could not make light of everything, especially not of the most
sacred matters. As usual he noticed my resistance even before I had said anything. "I know, " he said in a
resigned tone of voice, "it's the same old story: don't take these stories seriously! But I have to tell you
something: this is one of the very places that reveals the poverty of this religion most distinctly. The point is
that this God of both Old and New Testaments is certainly an extraordinary figure but not what he purports to
represent. He is all that is good, noble, fatherly, beautiful, elevated, sentimental--true! But the world consists
of something else besides. And what is left over is ascribed to the devil, this entire slice of world, this entire
half is suppressed and hushed up. In exactly the same way they praise God as the father of all life but simply
refuse to say a word about our sexual life on which it's all based, describing it whenever possible as sinful, the
work of the devil. I have no objection to worshiping this God Jehovah, far from it. But I mean we ought to
consider everything sacred, the entire world, not merely this artificially separated half! Thus alongside the
divine service we should also have a service for the devil. I feel that would be right. Otherwise you must
create for yourself a God that contains the devil too and in front of which you needn't close your eyes when
the most natural things in the world take place. " It was most unusual for him to become almost vehement.

But at once he smiled and did not probe any further. His words, however, touched directly on the whole secret
of my adolescence, a secret I carried with me every hour of the day and of which I had not said a word to
anyone, ever. What Demian had said about God and the devil, about the official godly and the suppressed
devilish one, corresponded exactly to my own thoughts, my own myth, my own conception of the world as
being divided into two halves--the light and the dark. The realization that my problem was one that concerned
all men, a problem of living and thinking, suddenly swept over me and I was overwhelmed by fear and respect
as I suddenly saw and felt how deeply my own personal life and opinions were immersed in the eternal stream
of great ideas. Though it offered some confirmation and gratification, the realization was not really a joyful
one. It was hard and had a harsh taste because it implied responsibility and no longer being allowed to be a
child; it meant standing on one's own feet. Revealing a deep secret for the first time in my life, I told my
friend of my conception of the "two worlds. " He saw immediately that my deepest feelings accorded with his
own. But it was not his way to take advantage of something like that. He listened to me more attentively than
he had ever before and peered into my eyes so that I was forced to avert mine. For I noticed in his gaze again
that strange animal-like look, expressing timelessness and unimaginable age. "We'll talk more about it some
other time, " he said forbearingly. "I can see that your thoughts are deeper than you yourself are able to
express. But since this is so, you know, don't you, that you've never lived what you are thinking and that isn't
good. Only the ideas that we actually live are of any value. You knew all along that your sanctioned world was
only half the world and you tried to suppress the second half the same way the priests and teachers do. You
won't succeed. No one succeeds in this once he has begun to think. " This went straight to my heart. "But
there are forbidden and ugly things in the world!" I almost shouted. "You can't deny that. And they are
forbidden, and we must renounce them. Of course I know that murder and all kinds of vices exist in the world
but should I become a criminal just because they exist?" "We won't be able to find all the answers today, "
Max soothed me. "Certainly you shouldn't go kill somebody or rape a girl, no! But you haven't reached the
point where you can understand the actual meaning of 'permitted' and 'forbidden. ' You've only sensed part of
the truth. You will feel the other part, too, you can depend on it. For instance, for about a year you have had to
struggle with a drive that is stronger than any other and which is considered 'forbidden. ' The Greeks and many
other peoples, on the other hand, elevated this drive, made it divine and celebrated it in great feasts. What is
forbidden, in other words, is not something eternal; it can change. Anyone can sleep with a woman as soon as
he's been to a pastor with her and has married her, yet other races do it differently, even nowadays. That is
why each of us has to find out for himself what is permitted and what is forbidden--forbidden for him. It's
possible for one never to transgress a single law and still be a bastard. And vice versa. Actually it's only a
question of convenience. Those who are too lazy and comfortable to think for themselves and be their own
judges obey the laws. Others sense their own laws within them; things are forbidden to them that every
honorable man will do any day in the year and other things are allowed to them that are generally despised.
Each person must stand on his own feet. " Suddenly he seemed to regret having said so much and fell silent. I
could already sense what he felt at such moments. Though he delivered his ideas in a pleasant and perfunctory
manner, he still could not stand conversation for its own sake, as he once told me. In my case, however, he
sensed--besides genuine interest--too much playfulness, too much sheer pleasure in clever gabbing, or
something of the sort; in short, a lack of complete commitment. As I reread the last two words I have just
written--complete commitment--a scene leaps to mind, the most impressive I ever experienced with Max
Demian in those days when I was still half a child. Confirmation day was approaching and our lessons had the
Last Supper for their topic. This was a matter of importance to the pastor and he took great pains explaining it
to us. One could almost taste the solemn mood during those last hours of instruction. And of all times it had to
be now that my thoughts were farthest from class, for they were fixed on my friend. While I looked ahead to
being confirmed, which was explained to us as a solemn acceptance into the community of the church, I could
not help thinking that the value of this religious instruction consisted for me not in what I had learned, but in
the proximity and influence of Max Demian. It was not into the church that I was ready to be received but into
something entirely different--into an order of thought and personality that must exist somewhere on earth and
whose representative or messenger I took to be my friend. I tried to suppress this idea--I was anxious to
involve myself in the Confirmation ceremony with a certain dignity, and this dignity seemed not to agree very
well with my new idea. Yet, no matter what I did, the thought was present and gradually it became firmly
linked with the approaching ceremony. I was ready to enact it differently from the others, for it was to signify
my acceptance into a world of thought as I had come to know it through Demian. On one of those days it

happened that we were having an argument just before class. My friend was tight-lipped and seemed to take
no pleasure in my talk, which probably was self-important as well as precocious. "We talk too much, " he said
with unwonted seriousness. "Clever talk is absolutely worthless. All you do in the process is lose yourself.
And to lose yourself is a sin. One has to be able to crawl completely inside oneself, like a tortoise. " Then we
entered the classroom. The lesson began and I made an effort to pay attention. Demian did not distract me.
After a while I began to sense something odd from the side where he sat, an emptiness or coolness or
something similar, as though the seat next to me had suddenly become vacant. When the feeling became
oppressive I turned to look. There I saw my friend sitting upright, his shoulders braced back as usual.
Nonetheless, he looked completely different and something emanated from him, something surrounded him
that was unknown to me. I first thought he had his eyes closed but then saw they were open. Yet they were not
focused on anything, it was an unseeing gaze--they seemed transfixed with looking inward or into a great
distance. He sat there completely motionless, not even seeming to breathe; his mouth might have been carved
from wood or stone. His face was pale, uniformly pale like a stone, and his brown hair was the part of him that
seemed closest to being alive. His hands lay before him on the bench, lifeless and still as objects, like stones or
fruit, pale, motionless yet not limp, but like good, strong pods sheathing a hidden, vigorous life. I trembled at
the sight. Dead, I thought, almost saying it aloud. My spellbound eyes were fixed on his face, on this pale
stone mask, and I felt: this is the real Demian. When he walked beside me or talked to me--that was only half
of him, someone who periodically plays a role, adapts himself, who out of sheer complaisance does as the
others do. The real Demian, however, looked like this, as primeval, animal, marble, beautiful and cold, dead
yet secretly filled with fabulous life. And around him this quiet emptiness, this ether, interstellar space, this
lonely death! Now he has gone completely into himself, I felt, and I trembled. Never had I been so alone. I
had no part in him; he was inaccessible; he was more remote from me than if he had been on the most distant
island in the world. I could hardly grasp it that no one besides me noticed him! Everyone should have looked
at him, everyone should have trembled! But no one heeded him. He sat there like a statue, and, I thought,
proud as an idol! A fly lighted on his forehead and scurried across his nose and lips--not a muscle twitched.
Where was he now? What was he thinking? What did he feel? Was he in heaven or was he in hell? I was
unable to put a question to him. At the end of the period, when I saw him alive and breathing again, as his
glance met mine, he was the same as he had been before. Where did he come from? Where had he been? He
seemed tired. His face was no longer pale, his hands moved again, but now the brown hair was without luster,
as though lifeless. During the next few days, I began a new exercise in my bedroom. I would sit rigid in a
chair, make my eyes rigid too, and stay completely motionless and see how long I could keep it up, and what I
would feel. I only felt very tired and my eyelids itched. Shortly afterwards we were confirmed, an event that
calls forth no important memories whatever. Now everything changed. My childhood world was breaking
apart around me. My parents eyed me with a certain embarrassment. My sisters had become strangers to me. A
disenchantment falsified and blunted my usual feelings and joys: the garden lacked fragrance, the woods held
no attraction for me, the world stood around me like a clearance sale of last year's secondhand goods, insipid,
all its charm gone. Books were so much paper, music a grating noise. That is the way leaves fall around a tree
in autumn, a tree unaware of the rain running down its sides, of the sun or the frost, and of life gradually
retreating inward. The tree does not die. It waits. It had been decided that I would be sent away to a boarding
school at the end of the vacation; for the first time I would be away from home. Sometimes my mother
approached me with particular tenderness, as if already taking leave of me ahead of time, intent on inspiring
love, homesickness, the unforgettable in my heart. Demian was away on a trip. I was alone.
4) Beatrice
At the end of the holidays, and without having seen my friend again, I went to St. ------. My parents
accompanied me and entrusted me to the care of a boy's boarding-house run by one of the teachers at the
preparatory school. They would have been struck dumb with horror had they known into what world they
were letting me wander. The question remained: was I eventually to become a good son and useful citizen or
did my nature point in an altogether different direction? My last attempt to achieve happiness in the shadow of
the paternal home had lasted a long time, had on occasion almost succeeded, but had completely failed in the
end. The peculiar emptiness and isolation that I came to feel for the first time after Confirmation (oh, how
familiar it was to become afterwards, this desolate, thin air!) passed only very slowly. My leave-taking from

home was surprisingly easy, I was almost ashamed that I did not feel more nostalgic. My sisters wept for no
reason; my eyes remained dry. I was astonished at myself. I had always been an emotional and essentially
good child. Now I had completely changed. I behaved with utter indifference to the world outside and for days
on end voices within preoccupied me, inner streams, the forbidden dark streams that roared below the surface.
I had grown several inches in the last half year and I walked lanky and half-finished through the world. I had
lost any charm I might ever have had and felt that no one could possibly love me the way I was. I certainly had
no love for myself. Often I felt a great longing for Max Demian, but no less often I hated him, accusing him of
having caused the impoverishment of my life that held me in its sway like a foul disease. I was neither liked
nor respected in my boys' boarding-house. I was teased to begin with, then avoided and looked upon as a
sneak and an unwelcome oddity. I fell in with this role, even exaggerated it, and grumbled myself into a
self-isolation that must have appeared to outsiders like permanent and masculine contempt of the world,
whereas, in truth, I often secretly succumbed to consuming fits of melancholy and despair. In school I
managed to get by on the knowledge accumulated in my previous class--the present one lagged somewhat
behind the one I had left--and I began to regard the students in my age group contemptuously as mere
children. It went on like this for a year or more. The first few visits back home left me cold. I was glad when I
could leave again. It was the beginning of November. I had become used to taking snort meditative walks
during all kinds of weather, walks on which I often enjoyed a kind of rapture tinged with melancholy, scorn of
the world and self-hatred. Thus I roamed in the foggy dusk one evening through the town. The broad avenue
of a public park stood deserted, beckoning me to enter; the path lay thickly carpeted with fallen leaves which I
stirred angrily with my feet. There was a damp, bitter smell, and distant trees, shadowy as ghosts, loomed
huge out of the mist. I stopped irresolute at the far end of the avenue: staring into the dark foliage I greedily
breathed the humid fragrance of decay and dying to which something within me responded with greeting.
Someone stepped out of one of the side paths, his coat billowing as he walked--I was about to continue when
a voice called out. "Hello, Sinclair. " He came up to me. It was Alfons Beck, the oldest boy in our
boardinghouse. I was always glad to see him, had nothing against him except that he treated me, and all others
who were younger, with an element of ironic and avuncular condescension. He was reputed to be strong as a
bear and to have the teacher in our house completely under his thumb. He was the hero of many a student
rumor. "Well, what are you doing here?" he called out affably in that tone the bigger boys affected when they
occasionally condescended to talk to one of us. "I'll bet anything you're making a poem. " "Wouldn't think of
it, " I replied brusquely. He laughed out loud, walked beside me, and made small talk in a way I hadn't been
used to for a long time. "You don't need to be afraid that I wouldn't understand, Sinclair. There's something to
walking with autumnal thoughts through the evening fog. One likes to compose poems at a time like that, I
know. About moribund nature, of course, and one's lost youth, which resembles it. Heinrich Heine, for
example. " "I'm not as sentimental as all that, " I defended myself. "All right, let's drop the subject. But it
seems to me that in weather like this a man does the right thing when he looks for a quiet place where he can
drink a good glass of wine or something. Will you join me? I happen to be all by myself at the moment. Or
would you rather not? I don't want to be the one who leads you astray, mon vieux, that is, in case you happen
to be the kind that keeps to the straight and narrow. " Soon afterwards we were sitting in a small dive at the
edge of town, drinking a wine of doubtful quality and clinking the thick glasses. I didn't much like it to begin
with, but at least it was something new. Soon, however, unused to the wine, I became very loquacious. It was
as though an interior window had opened through which the world sparkled. For how long, for how terribly
long hadn't I really talked to anyone? My imagination began to run away with me and eventually I even
popped out with the story of Cain and Abel. Beck listened with evident pleasure--finally here was someone to
whom I was able to give something! He patted me on the shoulder, called me one hell of a fellow, and my
heart swelled ecstatically at this opportunity to luxuriate in the release of a long pent-up need for talk and
communication, for acknowledgment from an older boy. When he called me a damned clever little bastard, the
words ran like sweet wine into my soul. The world glowed in new colors, thoughts gushed out of a hundred
audacious springs. The fire of enthusiasm flared up within me. We discussed our teachers and fellow students
and it seemed to me that we understood each other perfectly. We talked about the Greeks and the pagans in
general and Beck very much wanted me to confess to having slept with girls. This was out of my league. I
hadn't experienced anything, certainly nothing worth telling. And what I had felt, what I had constructed in
imagination, ached within me but had not been loosened or made communicable by the wine. Beck knew
much more about girls, so I listened to his exploits without being able to say a word. I heard incredible things.

Things I had never thought possible became everyday reality, seemed normal. Alfons Beck, who was eighteen,
seemed to be able to draw on a vast body of experience. For instance, he had learned that it was a funny thing
about girls, they just wanted to flirt, which was all very well, but not the real thing. For the real thing one
could hope for greater success with women. Women were much more reasonable. Mrs. Jaggelt, for example,
who owned the stationery store, well, with her one could talk business, and all the things that had happened
behind her counter wouldn't fit into a book. I sat there enchanted and also dumbfounded. Certainly, I could
never have loved Mrs. Jaggelt --yet the news was incredible. There seemed to be hidden sources of pleasure, at
least for the older boys, of which I had not even dreamed. Something about it didn't sound right, and it tasted
less appealing and more ordinary than love, I felt, was supposed to taste--but at least: this was reality, this was
life and adventure, and next to me sat someone who had experienced it, to whom it seemed normal. Once it
had reached this height, our conversation began to taper off. I was no longer the damned clever little bastard;
I'd shrunk to a mere boy listening to a man. Yet all the same--compared with what my life had been for
months--this was delicious, this was paradise. Besides, it was, as I began to realize only gradually, very much
prohibited--from our presence in the bar to the subject of our talk. At least for me it smacked of rebellion. I
can remember that night with remarkable clarity. We started on our way home through the damp, past gas
lamps dimly lighting the late night: for the first time in my life I was drunk. It was not pleasant. In fact it was
most painful, yet it had something, a thrill, a sweetness of rebellious orgy, that was life and spirit. Beck did a
good job taking charge of me, even though he cursed me bitterly as a "bloody beginner, " and half led, half
carried me home. There he succeeded in smuggling me through an open window in the hallway. The sober
reality to which I awoke after a brief deathlike sleep coincided with a painful and senseless depression. I sat up
in bed, still wearing my shirt. The rest of my clothes, strewn about on the floor, reeked of tobacco and vomit.
Between fits of headache, nausea, and a raging thirst an image came to mind which I had not viewed for a long
time: I visualized my parents' house, my home, my father and mother, my sisters, the garden. I could see the
familiar bedroom, the school, the market place, could see Demian and the Confirmation classes--everything
was wonderful, godly pure, and everything, all of this--as I realized now--had still been mine yesterday, a few
hours ago, had waited for me; yet now, at this very hour, everything looked ravaged and damned, was mine no
longer, rejected me, regarded me with disgust. Everything dear and intimate, everything my parents had given
me as far back as the distant gardens of my childhood, every kiss from my mother, every Christmas, each
devout, light-filled Sunday morning at home, each and every flower in the garden--everything had been laid
waste, everything had been trampled onby me! If the arm of the law had reached out for me now, had bound
and gagged me and led me to the gallows as the scum of the earth and a desecrator of the temple, I would not
have objected, would have gladly gone, would have considered it just and fair. So that's what I looked like
inside! I who was going about contemptuous of the world! I who was proud in spirit and shared Demian's
thoughts! That's what I looked like, a piece of excrement, a filthy swine, drunk and filthy, loathsome and
callow, a vile beast brought low by hideous appetites. That's what I looked like, I, who came out of such pure
gardens where everything was cleanliness, radiance, and tenderness, I, who had loved the music of Bach and
beautiful poetry. With nausea and outrage I could still hear my life, drunk and unruly, sputtering out of me in
idiotic laughter, in jerks and fits. There I was. In spite of everything, I almost reveled in my agonies. I had
been blind and insensible and my heart had been silent for so long, had cowered impoverished in a corner, that
even this self-accusation, this dread, all these horrible feelings were welcome. At least it was feeling of some
kind, at least there were some flames, the heart at least flickered. Confusedly I felt something like liberation
amid my misery. Meanwhile, viewed from the outside, I was going rapidly downhill. My first drunken frenzy
was soon followed by others. There was much going to bars and carousing in our school. I was one of the
youngest to take part, yet soon enough I was not merely a fledgling whom one grudgingly took along, I had
become the ringleader and star, a notorious and daring bar crawler. Once again I belonged entirely to the
world of darkness and to the devil, and in this world I had the reputation of being one hell of a fellow.
Nonetheless, I felt wretched. I lived in an orgy of self-destruction and, while my friends regarded me as a
leader and as a damned sharp and funny fellow, deep down inside me my soul grieved. I can still remember
tears springing to my eyes when I saw children playing in the street on Sunday morning as I emerged from a
bar, children with freshly combed hair and dressed in their Sunday best. Those friends who sat with me in the
lowest dives among beer puddles and dirty tables I amused with remarks of unprecedented cynicism, often
even shocked them; yet in my inmost heart I was in awe of everything I belittled and lay weeping before my
soul, my past, my mother, before God. There was good reason why I never became one with my companions,

why I felt alone among them and was therefore able to suffer so much. I was a barroom hero and cynic to
satisfy the taste of the most brutal. I displayed wit and courage in my ideas and remarks about teachers,
school, parents, and church. I could also bear to hear the filthiest stories and even ventured an occasional one
myself, but I never accompanied my friends when they visited women. I was alone and was filled with intense
longing for love, a hopeless longing, while, to judge by my talk, I should have been a hard-boiled sensualist.
No one was more easily hurt, no one more bashful than I. And when I happened to see the young
well-brought-up girls of the town walking in front of me, pretty and clean, innocent and graceful, they seemed
like wonderful pure dreams, a thousand times too good for me. For a time I could not even bring myself to
enter Mrs. Jaggelt's stationery store because I blushed looking at her remembering what Alfons Beck had told
me. The more I realized that I was to remain perpetually lonely and different within my new group of friends
the less I was able to break away. I really don't know any longer whether boozing and swaggering actually
ever gave me any pleasure. Moreover, I never became so used to drinking that I did not always feel
embarrassing after-effects. It was all as if I were somehow under a compulsion to do these things. I simply did
what I had to do, because I had no idea what to do with myself otherwise. I was afraid of being alone for long,
was afraid of the many tender and chaste moods that would overcome me, was afraid of the thoughts of love
surging up in me. What I missed above all else was a friend. There were two or three fellow students whom I
could have cared for, but they were in good standing and my vices had long been an open secret. They avoided
me. I was regarded by and large as a hopeless rebel whose ground was slipping from under his feet. The
teachers were well-informed about me, I had been severely punished several times, my final expulsion seemed
merely a matter of time. I realized myself that I had become a poor student, but I wriggled strenuously through
one exam after the other, always feeling that it couldn't go on like this much longer. There are numerous ways
in which God can make us lonely and lead us back to ourselves. This was the way He dealt with me at that
time. It was like a bad dream. I can see myself: crawling along in my odious and unclean way, across filth and
slime, across broken beer glasses and through cynically wasted nights, a spellbound dreamer, restless and
racked. There are dreams in which on your way to the princess you become stuck in quagmires, in back alleys
full of foul odors and refuse. That was how it was with me. In this unpleasant fashion I was condemned to
become lonely, and I raised between myself and my childhood a locked gateway to Eden with its pitilessly
resplendent host of guardians. It was a beginning, an awakening of nostalgia for my former self. Yet I had not
become so callous as not to be startled into twinges of fear when my father, alarmed by my tutor's letters,
appeared for the first time in St. ------and confronted me unexpectedly. Later on that winter, when he came a
second time, nothing could move me any more, I let him scold and entreat me, let him remind me of my
mother. Finally toward the end of the meeting he became quite angry and said if I didn't change he would have
me expelled from the school in disgrace and placed in a reformatory. Well, let him! When he went away that
time I felt sorry for him; he had accomplished nothing, he had not found a way to me--and at moments I felt
that it served him right. I could not have cared less what became of me. In my odd and unattractive fashion,
going to bars and bragging was my way of quarreling with the world--this was my way of protesting. I was
ruining myself in the process but at times I understood the situation as follows: if the world had no use for
people like me, if it did not have a better place and higher tasks for them, well, in that case, people like me
would go to pot, and the loss would be the world's. Christmas vacation was a joyless affair that year. My
mother was deeply startled when she saw me. I had shot up even more and my lean face looked gray and
wasted, with slack features and inflamed eyes. The first touch of a mustache and the eyeglasses I had just
begun wearing made me look odder still. My sisters shied away and giggled. Everything was most unedifying.
Disagreeable and bitter was the talk I had with my father in his study, disagreeable exchanging greetings with
a handful of relatives, and particularly unpleasant was Christmas Eve itself. Ever since I had been a little child
this had been the great day in our house. The evening was a festivity of love and gratitude, when the bond
between child and parents was renewed. This time everything was merely oppressive and embarrassing. As
usual my father read aloud the passage about the shepherds in the fields "watching their flocks, " as usual my
sisters stood radiantly before a table decked with gifts, but father's voice sounded disgruntled, his face looked
old and strained, and mother was sad. Everything seemed out of place: the presents and Christmas greetings,
Gospel reading and the lit-up tree. The gingerbread smelled sweet; it exuded a host of memories which were
even sweeter. The fragrance of the Christmas tree told of a world that no longer existed. I longed for evening
and for the holidays to be over. It went on like this the entire winter. Only a short while back I had been given
a stern warning by the teachers' council and been threatened with expulsion. It couldn't go on much longer.

Well, I didn't care. I held a very special grudge against Max Demian, whom I hadn't seen again even once. I
had written him twice during my first months in St. ------but had received no reply; so I had not called on him
during the holidays. In the same park in which I had met Alfons Beck in the fall, a girl came to my attention
in early spring as the thorn hedges began to bud. I had taken a walk by myself, my head filled with vile
thoughts and worries--for my health had deteriorated--and to make matters worse I was perpetually in
financial difficulties, owed friends considerable sums and had thus continually to invent expenditures so as to
receive money from home. In a number of stores I had allowed bills to mount for cigars and similar things.
Not that this worried me much. If my existence was about to come to a sudden end anyway--if I drowned
myself or was sent to the reformatory--a few small extras didn't make much difference. Yet I was forced to
live face to face with these unpleasant details: they made me wretched. On that spring day in the park I saw a
young woman who attracted me. She was tall and slender, elegantly dressed, and had an intelligent and boyish
face. I liked her at once. She was my type and began to fill my imagination. She probably was not much older
than I but seemed far more mature, well-defined, a full-grown woman, but with a touch of exuberance and
boyishness in her face, and this was what I liked above all. I had never managed to approach a girl with whom
I had fallen in love, nor did I manage in this case. But the impression she made on me was deeper than any
previous one had been and the infatuation had a profound influence on my life. Suddenly a new image had
risen up before me, a lofty and cherished image. And no need, no urge was as deep or as fervent within me as
the craving to worship and admire. I gave her the name Beatrice, for, even though I had not read Dante, I knew
about Beatrice from an English painting of which I owned a reproduction. It showed a young pre-Raphaelite
woman, long-limbed and slender, with long head and etherealized hands and features. My beautiful young
woman did not quite resemble her, even though she, too, revealed that slender and boyish figure which I
loved, and something of the ethereal, soulful quality of her face. Although I never addressed a single word to
Beatrice, she exerted a profound influence on me at that time. She raised her image before me, she gave me
access to a holy shrine, she transformed me into a worshiper in a temple. From one day to the next I stayed
clear of all bars and nocturnal exploits. I could be alone with myself again and enjoyed reading and going for
long walks. My sudden conversion drew a good deal of mockery in its wake. But now I had something I
loved and venerated, I had an ideal again, life was rich with intimations of mystery and a feeling of dawn that
made me immune to all taunts. I had come home again to myself, even if only as the slave and servant of a
cherished image. I find it difficult to think back to that time without a certain fondness. Once more I was
trying most strenuously to construct an intimate "world of light" for myself out of the shambles of a period of
devastation; once more I sacrificed everything within me to the aim of banishing darkness and evil from
myself. And, furthermore, this present "world of light" was to some extent my own creation; it was no longer
an escape, no crawling back to mother and the safety of irresponsibility; it was a new duty, one I had invented
and desired on my own, with responsibility and self-control. My sexuality, a torment from which I was in
constant flight, was to be transfigured into spirituality and devotion by this holy fire. Everything dark and
hateful was to be banished, there were to be no more tortured nights, no excitement before lascivious pictures,
no eavesdropping at forbidden doors, no lust. In place of all this I raised my altar to the image of Beatrice, and
by consecrating myself to her I consecrated myself to the spirit and to the gods, sacrificing that part of life
which I withdrew from the forces of darkness to those of light. My goal was not joy but purity, not happiness
but beauty, and spirituality. This cult of Beatrice completely changed my life. Yesterday a precocious cynic,
today I was an acolyte whose aim was to become a saint. I not only avoided the bad life to which I had
become accustomed, I sought to transform myself by introducing purity and nobility into every aspect of my
life. In this connection I thought of my eating and drinking habits, my language and dress. I began my
mornings with cold baths which cost me a great effort at first. My behavior became serious and dignified; I
carried myself stiffly and assumed a slow and dignified gait. It may have looked comic to outsiders but to me
it was a genuine act of worship. Of all the new practices in which I sought to express my new conviction, one
became truly important to me. I began to paint. The starting point for this was that the reproduction of the
English picture I owned did not resemble my Beatrice closely enough. I wanted to try to paint her portrait for
myself. With new joy and hopefulness I bought beautiful paper, paints, and brushes and carried them to my
room--I had just been given one of my own--and prepared my palette, glass, porcelain dishes and pencils. The
delicate tempera colors in the little tubes I had bought delighted me. Among them was a fiery chrome green
that, I think, I can still see today as it flashed up for the first time in the small white dish. I began with great
care. Painting the likeness of a face was difficult. I wanted to try myself out first on something else. I painted

ornaments, flowers, small imagined landscapes: a tree by a chapel, a Roman bridge with cypress trees.
Sometimes I became so completely immersed in this game that I was as happy as a little child with his
paintbox. Finally I set out on my portrait of Beatrice. A few attempts failed completely and I discarded them.
The more I sought to imagine the face of the girl I had encountered here and there on the street the less
successful I was. Finally I gave up the attempt and contented myself with giving in to my imagination and
intuition that arose spontaneously from the first strokes, as though out of the paint and brush themselves. It
was a dream face that emerged and I was not dissatisfied with it. Yet I persisted and every new sketch was
more distinct, approximated more nearly the type I desired, even if it in no way reproduced reality. I grew
more and more accustomed to idly drawing lines with a dreaming paintbrush and to coloring areas for which I
had no model in mind, that were the result of playful fumblings of my subconscious. Finally, one day I
produced, almost without knowing it, a face to which I responded more strongly than I had to any of the
others. It was not the face of that girl--it wasn't supposed to be that any longer. It was something else,
something unreal, yet it was no less valuable to me. It looked more like a boy's face than a girl's, the hair was
not flaxen like that of my pretty girl, but dark brown with a reddish hue. The chin was strong and determined,
the mouth like a red flower. As a whole it was somewhat stiff and masklike but it was impressive and full of a
secret life of its own. As I sat down in front of the completed painting, it had an odd effect on me. It
resembled a kind of image of God or a holy mask, half male, half female, ageless, as purposeful as it was
dreamy, as rigid as it was secretly alive. This face seemed to have a message for me, it belonged to me, it was
asking something of me. It bore a resemblance to someone, yet I did not know whom. For a time this portrait
haunted my thoughts and shared my life. I kept it locked in a drawer so that no one would take it and taunt me
with it. But as soon as I was alone in my small room I took it out and communed with it. In the evening I
pinned it on the wall facing my bed and gazed on it until I fell asleep and in the morning it was the first thing
my eyes opened on. It was precisely at this time that I again began having many dreams, as I had always had
as a child. It felt as though I had not dreamed for years. Now the dreams returned with entirely new images,
and time after time the portrait appeared among them, alive and eloquent, friendly or hostile to me, sometimes
distorted into a grimace, sometimes infinitely beautiful, harmonious, and noble. Then one morning, as I
awoke from one of these dreams, I suddenly recognized it. It looked at me as though it were fabulously
familiar and seemed to call out my name. It seemed to know who I was, like a mother, as if its eyes had been
fixed on me since the beginning of time. With a quivering heart I stared at the sheet, the close brown hair, the
half-feminine mouth, the pronounced forehead with the strange brightness (it had dried this way of its own
accord) and I felt myself coming nearer and nearer to the recognition, the rediscovery, the knowledge. I leapt
out of bed, stepped up to the face, and from inches away looked into its wide-open, greenish, rigid eyes, the
right one slightly higher than the left. All at once the right eye twitched, ever so faintly and delicately but
unmistakably, and I was able to recognize the picture... Why had it taken me so long? It was Demian's face.
Later I often compared the portrait with Demian's true features as I remembered them. They were by no
means the same even though there was a resemblance. Nonetheless, it was Demian. Once the early-summer
sun slanted oblique and red into a window that faced westward. Dusk was growing in my room. It occurred to
me to pin the portrait of Beatrice, or Demian, at the window crossbar and to observe the evening sun shine
through it. The outlines of the face became blurred but the red-rimmed eyes, the brightness on the forehead,
and the bright red mouth glowed deep and wild from the surface. I sat facing it for a long time, even after the
sun had faded, and gradually I began to sense that this was neither Beatrice nor Demian but myself. Not that
the picture resembled me--I did not feel that it should--but it was what determined my life, it was my inner
self, my fate or my daemon. That's what my friend would look like if I were to find one ever again. That's
what the woman I would love would look like if ever I were to love one. That's what my life and death would
be like, this was the tone and rhythm of my fate. During those weeks I had begun to read a book that made a
more lasting impression on me than anything I had read before. Even later in life I have rarely experienced a
book more intensely, except perhaps Nietzsche. It was a volume of Novalis, containing letters and aphorisms
of which I understood only a few but which nevertheless held an inexpressible attraction for me. One of the
aphorisms occurred to me now and I wrote it under the picture: "Fate and temperament are two words for one
and the same concept. " That was clear to me now. I often caught sight of the girl I called Beatrice but I felt
no emotion during these encounters, only a gentle harmony, a presentiment: you and I are linked, but not you,
only your picture; you are a part of my fate. My longing for Max Demian overwhelmed me again. I had had
no news of him for years. Once I had met him during a vacation. I realized now that I suppressed this brief

encounter in my notes and I realize that it was done out of vanity and shame. I have to make up for it. Thus,
during one of my holidays as I strolled through my home town, wearing the blasé, always slightly weary
expression of my bar-crawling days, peering into the same old, despised faces of the philistines, I saw my
former friend walking toward me. I had hardly seen him when I flinched. At the same moment I could not help
thinking of Franz Kromer. If only Demian had really forgotten that episode! It was so unpleasant to be
obligated to him. It was actually a silly children's story but an obligation nonetheless... He appeared to wait:
would I greet him? When I did so as casually as possible he stretched out his hand. Yes, that was his grip! As
firm, warm yet cool, and virile as ever! He scrutinized my face and said: "You've grown, Sinclair. " He
himself seemed quite the same, as old or as young as ever. He joined me and we took a walk, but talked of
only inconsequential matters. It occurred to me that I had written him several times without getting a reply. I
hoped that he'd forgotten that too, those stupid letters! He did not mention them. At that time I had not yet met
Beatrice and there was no portrait. I was still in the midst of my drunken period. At the outskirts of town I
asked him to join me for a glass of wine and he did so. At once I made a big show of ordering a whole bottle,
filled his glass, clinked mine with his, and displayed my great familiarity with student drinking customs by
downing the first glass in one swallow. "You spend a lot of time in bars, do you?" he asked. "Well, yes, " I
replied. "What else is there to do? In the end it's more fun than anything else. " "You think? Maybe so. One
part of it is of course very fine--the intoxication, the bacchanalian element. But I think most people that
frequent bars have lost that entirely. It seems to me that going to bars is something genuinely philistine. Yes,
for one night, with burning torches, a real wild drunk! But again and again, one little glass after the other, I
wonder whether that's the real thing or not? Can you see Faust sitting night after night stooped over the bar?"
I took a swallow and looked at him with hostility. "Well, not everybody's Faust, " I said curtly. He looked at
me somewhat taken aback. Then he laughed at me in his old lively and superior fashion. "Well, let's not fight
over it! In any case, the life of a drunk is presumably livelier than that of the ordinary well-behaved citizen.
And then--I read that once somewhere--the life of a hedonist is the best preparation for becoming a mystic.
People like St. Augustine are always the ones that become visionaries. He, too, was first a sensualist and man
of the world. " I distrusted him and didn't want him to gain the upper hand under any circumstance. So I said
superciliously: "Well, everybody to his own taste. As for me, I've no ambition to become a visionary or
anything of the sort. " Demian gave me a brief shrewd look out of half-closed eyes. "My dear Sinclair, " he
said slowly, "I didn't intend to tell you anything disagreeable. Besides --neither of us knows why you happen
to be drinking wine at this moment. That which is within you and directs your life knows already. It's good to
realize that within us there is someone who knows everything, wills everything, does everything better than
we ourselves. But excuse me, I must go home. " We exchanged brief good-bys. I stayed on moodily and
finished the bottle. When I wanted to leave I discovered that Demian had paid the bill--which put me in an
even worse humor. My thoughts returned to this small incident with Demian. I could not forget him. And the
words he said to me in that bar at the edge of town would come to mind, strangely fresh and intact: "It's good
to realize that within us there is someone who knows everything. " How I longed for Demian. I had no idea
where he was nor how I could reach him. All I knew was that he was presumably studying at some university
and that his mother had left town after he completed preparatory school. I tried to remember whatever I could
of Max Demian, reaching back as far as the Kromer episode. How much of what he had said to me over the
years returned to mind, was still meaningful today, was appropriate and concerned me! And what he had said
on our last and quite disagreeable meeting about a wasted life leading to sainthood suddenly also stood clearly
before me. Wasn't that exactly what had happened to me? Hadn't I lived in drunkenness and squalor, dazed
and lost, until just the opposite had come alive in me with a new zest for life, the longing for purity, the
yearning for the sacred? So I continued to pursue these memories. Night had long since come and now rain
was falling. In my memories, too, I heard the rain: it was the hour under the chestnut trees when he had probed
me about Franz Kromer and guessed my first secrets. One incident after another came back to me,
conversations on the way to school, the Confirmation classes, and last of all my first meeting with him. What
had we talked about? I couldn't find it at once, but I gave myself time, concentrating intensely. And now even
that returned. We had stood before my parents' house after he had told me his version of the story of Cain.
Then he had mentioned the old, half-hidden coat of arms situated in the keystone above our entrance. He had
said that such things interested him and that one ought to attend to them. That night I dreamed of Demian and
the coat of arms. It kept changing continuously. Demian held it in his hand, often it was diminutive and gray,
often powerful and varicolored, but he explained to me that it was always one and the same thing. In the end

he obliged me to eat the coat of arms! When I had swallowed it, I felt to my horror that the heraldic bird was
coming to life inside me, had begun to swell up and devour me from within. Deathly afraid I started up in bed,
awoke. I was wide awake; it was the middle of the night and I could hear rain pouring into the room. As I got
up to close the window I stepped on something that shone bright on the floor. In the morning I discovered that
it had been my painting. It lay in a puddle and the paper had warped. I placed it between two sheets of blotting
paper inside a heavy book. When I looked at it again the next day it wasdry, but had changed. The red mouth
had faded and con-tracted a little. It now looked exactly like Demian's mouth. I set about painting a fresh
picture of the heraldic bird. I could not remember distinctly what it looked like and certain details, as I knew,
could not be made out even from close up, because the thing was old and had often been painted over. The
bird stood or perched on something, perhaps on a flower or on a basket or a nest, or on a treetop. I couldn't
trouble myself over this detail and began with what I could visualize clearly. Out of an indistinct need I at
once began to employ loud colors, painting the bird's head a golden yellow. Whenever the mood took me, I
worked on the picture, bringing it to completion in several days. Now it represented a bird of prey with a
proud aquiline sparrow hawk's head, half its body stuck in some dark globe out of which it was struggling to
free itself as though from a giant egg--all of this against a sky-blue background. As I continued to scrutinize
the sheet it looked to me more and more like the many-colored coat of arms that had occurred to me in my
dream. I could not have written Demian even if I had known his address. I decided, however--in the same
state of dreamlike presentiment in which I did everything--to send him the painting of the sparrow hawk, even
if it would never reach him. I added no message, not even my name, carefully trimmed the edges and wrote
my friend's former address on it. Then I mailed it. I had an exam coming up and had to do more work than
usual. The teachers had reinstated me in their favor since I had abruptly changed my previously despicable
mode of life. Not that I had become an outstanding student, but now neither I nor anyone else gave it any
further thought that half a year earlier my expulsion had seemed almost certain. My father's letters regained
some of their old tone, with-out reproaches or threats. Yet I felt no inclination to explain to him or anyone else
how the change within me had come about. It was an accident that this transformation coincided with my
parents' and teachers' wishes. This change did not bring me into the community of the others, did not make me
closer to anyone, but actually made me even lonelier. My reformation seemed to point in the direction of
Demian, but even this was a distant fate. I did not know myself, for I was too deeply involved. It had begun
with Beatrice, but for some time I had been living in such an unreal world with my paintings and my thoughts
of Demian that I'd forgotten all about her, too. I could not have uttered a single word about my dreams and
expectations, my inner change, to anyone, not even if I had wanted to. But how could I have wanted to? 5)
"The Bird Fights Its Way Out of the Egg"
My painted dream bird was on its way searching for my friend. In what seemed the strangest possible manner
a reply reached me. In my classroom, on my desk, after a break between two lessons I found a note tucked in
my book. It was folded exactly the same as notes classmates of mine secretly slipped each other during class. I
was only surprised to receive such a note at all, for I had never had that sort of relationship with any student. I
thought it would turn out to be an invitation to some prank in which I would not participate anyway--I put the
note unread in the front of my book. I came on it again only during the lesson. Playing with the note I
unfolded it carelessly and noticed a few words written on it. One glance was sufficient. One word stopped me
cold; in panic I read on while cold fear contracted my heart: "The bird rights its way out of the egg. The egg is
the world. Who would be born must first destroy a world. The bird flies to God. That God's name is Abraxas. "
After reading over these lines a number of times, I sank into a deep reverie. There could be no doubt about it,
this was Demian's reply. No one else could know about my painting. He had grasped its meaning and was
helping me interpret it. But how did all of this fit together? And--this oppressed me most of all--what did
Abraxas signify? I had never heard nor read the word. "That God's name is Abraxas. " The lesson went on
without my taking in a word of it. The next began, the last that morning. It was taught by a young assistant, a
Dr. Pollens, who had just completed his university studies, whom we liked simply because he was young and
unpretentious. Dr. Pollens was guiding us through Herodotus--one of the few subjects that held any interest
for me. But today not even Herodotus could hold my attention. I opened the book mechanically but did not
follow the translation and remained sunk deep in my own thoughts. Besides, I had frequently confirmed what
Demian had told me once during our Confirmation classes: you can achieve anything you desire passionately
enough. If I happened to be involved with my own thoughts during a lesson I did not have to worry that the

teacher would call on me. If I was distracted or listless, then he would suddenly appear beside me. That had
already happened to me. But if I really concentrated, completely wrapped up in a thought of my own, then I
was protected. I had also experimented with the trick of staring a person down and had found that it worked.
When still with Demian, I had not succeeded in this; now I often felt that a good deal could be accomplished
by a sharp glance, and thought. I was at present nowhere near Herodotus or school. Suddenly the teacher's
voice shot like lightning into my consciousness and I awoke terrified. I heard his voice, he practically stood
next to me, I even thought he had called my name. But he was not looking at me. I relaxed. Then I heard his
voice again. Loudly it pronounced the word "Abraxas. " In the course of a long explanation, whose beginning
I had missed, Dr. Pollens went on: "We ought not consider the opinions of those sects and mystical societies
as naïve as they appear from the rationalist point of view. Science as we know it today was unknown to
antiquity. Instead there existed a preoccupation with philosophical and mystical truths which was highly
developed. What grew out of this preoccupation was to some extent merely pedestrian magic and frivolity;
perhaps it frequently led to deceptions and crimes, but this magic, too, had noble antecedents in a profound
philosophy. As, for instance, the teachings concerning Abraxas which I cited a moment ago. This name occurs
in connection with Greek magical formulas and is frequently considered the name of some magician's helper
such as certain uncivilized tribes believe in even at present. But it appears that Abraxas has a much deeper
significance. We may conceive of the name as that of a godhead whose symbolic task is the uniting of godly
and devilish elements. " The learned little man spoke with intelligence and eagerness but no one paid much
attention, and as the name Abraxas did not recur, my thoughts turned back to my own affairs. "Uniting of
godly and devilish elements" resounded within me. Here was something for my thoughts to cling to. This idea
was familiar to me from conversations with Demian. During the last period of our friendship he had said that
we had been given a god to worship who represented only one arbitrarily separated half of the world (it was
the official, sanctioned, luminous world), but that we ought to be able to worship the whole world; this meant
that we would either have to have a god who was also a devil or institute a cult of the devil alongside the cult
of god. And now Abraxas was the god who was both god and devil. For a time I pursued this thought eagerly
but without making any headway. I even pored over a whole libraryful of books seeking a mention of
Abraxas. However, my nature had never been disposed to this kind of direct and conscious investigation
where at first one finds only truths that are so much dead weight in one's hand. The figure of Beatrice with
which I had occupied myself so intimately and fervently gradually became submerged or, rather, was slowly
receding, approaching the horizon more and more, becoming more shadowy and remote, paler. She no longer
satisfied the longings of my soul. In the peculiar self-made isolation in which I existed like a sleepwalker, a
new growth began to take shape within me. The longing for life grew--or rather the longing for love. My
sexual drive, which I had sublimated for a time in the veneration of Beatrice, demanded new images and
objects. But my desires remained unfulfilled and it was more impossible than ever for me to deceive my
longings and hope for something from the women with whom my comrades tried their luck. I dreamed vividly
again, more in fact by day than at night. Images, pictures, desires arose freely within me, drew me away from
the outside world so that I had a more substantial and livelier relationship with the world of my own creation,
with these images and dreams and shadows, than with the actual world around me. A certain dream, or
fantasy, that kept recurring gained in meaning for me. The dream, the most important and enduringly
significant of my life, went something like this: I was returning to my father's house--above the entrance
glowed the heraldic bird, yellow on a blue background; in the house itself my mother was coming toward
me--but as I entered and wanted to embrace her, it was not she but a form I had never set eyes on before, tall
and strong, resembling Max Demian and the picture I had painted; yet different, for despite its strength it was
completely feminine. This form drew me to itself and enveloped me in a deep, tremulous embrace. I felt a
mixture of ecstasy and horror--the embrace was at once an act of divine worship and a crime. Too many
associations with my mother and friend commingled with this figure embracing me. Its embrace violated all
sense of reverence, yet it was bliss. Sometimes I awoke from this dream with a feeling of profound ecstasy, at
others in mortal fear and with a racked conscience as though I had committed some terrible crime. Only
gradually and unconsciously did this very intimate image become linked with the hint about the God I was to
search for, the hint that had come to me from the outside. The link grew closer and more intimate and I began
to sense that I was calling on Abraxas particularly in this dreamed presentiment. Delight and horror, man and
woman commingled, the holiest and most shocking were intertwined, deep guilt flashing through most
delicate innocence: that was the appearance of my love-dream image and Abraxas, too. Love had ceased to be

the dark animalistic drive I had experienced at first with fright, nor was it any longer the devout transfiguration
I had offered to Beatrice. It was both, and yet much more. It was the image of an angel and Satan, man and
woman in one flesh, man and beast, the highest good and the worst evil. It seemed that I was destined to live
in this fashion, this seemed my preordained fate. I yearned for it but feared it at the same time. It was
ever-present, hovering constantly above me. The following spring I was to leave the preparatory school and
enter a university. I was still undecided, however, as to where and what I was to study. I had grown a thin
mustache, I was a full-grown man, and yet I was completely helpless and without a goal in life. Only one thing
was certain: the voice within me, the dream image. I felt the duty to follow this voice blindly wherever it
might lead me. But it was difficult and each day I rebelled against it anew. Perhaps I was mad, as I thought at
moments; perhaps I was not like other men? But I was able to do the same things the others did; with a little
effort and industry I could read Plato, was able to solve problems in trigonometry or follow a chemical
analysis. There was only one thing I could not do: wrest the dark secret goal from myself and keep it before
me as others did who knew exactly what they wanted to be--professors, lawyers, doctors, artists, however long
this would take them and whatever difficulties and advantages this decision would bear in its wake. This I
could not do. Perhaps I would become something similar, but how was I to know? Perhaps I would have to
continue my search for years on end and would not become anything, and would not reach a goal. Perhaps I
would reach this goal but it would turn out to be an evil, dangerous, horrible one? I wanted only to try to live
in accord with the promptings which came from my true self. Why was that so very difficult? I made frequent
attempts to paint the mighty love apparition of my dream. I never succeeded. If I had I would have sent the
painting to Demian. Where he was I had no idea. I only knew that we were linked. When would we meet
again? The tranquillity of the weeks and months of my Beatrice period had long since passed. At that time I
felt I had reached a safe harbor, an island of peace. But as always, as soon as I had become accustomed to my
condition, as soon as a dream had given me hope, it wilted and became useless. It was futile to sorrow after the
loss. I now lived within a fire of unsatisfied longing, of tense expectancy that often drove me completely wild.
I often saw the beloved apparition of my dream with a clarity greater than life, more distinct than my own
hand, spoke with it, wept before it, cursed it. I called it mother and knelt down in front of it in tears. I called it
my beloved and had a premonition of its ripe all-fulfilling kiss. I called it devil and whore, vampire and
murderer. It enticed me to the gentlest love-dreams and to devastating shamelessness, nothing was too good
and precious, nothing was too wicked and low for it. I experienced the whole of that winter as one unending
inner turbulence, which I find difficult to describe. I had long since become used to my loneliness--that did not
oppress me: I lived with Demian, the sparrow hawk, with the mighty apparition of my dream that was both my
fate and my beloved. This was enough to sustain me, for everything pointed toward vastness and space--it all
pointed toward Abraxas. But none of these dreams, none of these thoughts obeyed me, none were at my beck
and call, I could color none of them as I pleased. They came and took me, I was ruled by them, was their
vessel. However, I was well armed against the outside world. I was no longer afraid of people; even my
fellow students had come to know this and treated me with a secret respect that often brought a smile to my
lips. If I wanted to I could see through most of them and startled them occasionally. Only I rarely or never
tried. I was always preoccupied with myself. And I longed desperately to really live for once, to give
something of myself to the world, to enter into a relationship and battle with it. Sometimes when I ran through
the streets in the evening, unable to return before midnight because I was so restless, I felt that now at this very
moment I would have to meet my beloved--as she walked past me at the next street corner, called to me from
the nearest window. At other times all of this seemed unbearably painful and I was prepared to commit
suicide. Just then I found a strange refuge--"by chance, " as they say--though I believe there is no such thing.
If you need something desperately and find it, this is not an accident; your own craving and compulsion leads
you to it Twice or three times during my walks I had heard organ music coming from a small church at the
edge of town. I had not stopped to listen. The next time I passed this church I heard the music again and
recognized Bach. I went to the door, found it locked, and because the street was almost deserted I sat down on
a curbstone next to the church, turned up my coat collar, and listened. It was not a big organ but it had good
tone. It was being played with a strange, highly personal expression of purpose and tenacity that gave the
impression of prayer. I felt that the organist knew the treasures hidden in the music, that he was wooing,
hammering at the gate, wrestling for this treasure as for his life. My knowledge of music is technically very
limited but from childhood on I have had an intuitive grasp, have sensed music as something self-evident
within me. The organist also played something more modern--it could have been Max Reger. The church was

almost completely dark, only a very thin beam of light penetrated the window closest to me. I waited until the
music ceased and then paced back and forth until I saw the organist leave the church. He was still young,
though older than I, square-shouldered and squat, and he moved off rapidly with vigorous yet seemingly
reluctant strides. From then on I occasionally sat outside the church or paced up and down before it during the
evening hours. Once I even found the door open and sat for half an hour in a pew, shivering against the cold,
yet happy as long as the organist played in the loft. I not only distinguished his personality in the music he
played--every piece he performed also had affinity with the next, a secret connection. Everything he played
was full of faith, surrender, and devotion. Yet not devout after the fashion of churchgoers and pastors, devout
the way pilgrims and mendicants were in the Middle Ages, devout with that unconditional surrender to a
universal feeling that transcends all confessions. He also played music composed prior to Bach, and the old
Italians. And all this music said the same thing, all of it expressed what was in the musician's soul: longing, a
most intimate atonement with the world and a violent wrenching loose, a burning hearkening to one's own
dark soul, an intoxicating surrender and deep curiosity about the miraculous. Once when I shadowed the
organist after he left the church, I saw him enter a small tavern on the edge of town. I could not resist
following him in. For the first time I could see him clearly. He sat at a table in the far corner of the small
room. He wore a black felt hat. A jug of wine stood before him. His face looked as I suspected it would. He
was ugly and a little wild, inquisitive and pigheaded, capricious and determined, yet his mouth had a soft
childlike quality. All his masculinity and strength were concentrated in eyes and forehead, while the lower part
of the face was sensitive and immature, uncontrolled and somehow very soft. The irresolute, boyish chin
appeared to contradict the forehead and eyes--which I liked, those dark-brown eyes, full of pride and hostility.
I sat down opposite him without saying a word. We were the only two guests in the tavern. He gave me a look
as though he wanted to shoo me away. But I did not budge, and stared back unmoved until he grumbled
morosely: "What on earth are you staring at? Is there something you want?" "No, I don't want anything from
you, " I said. "You've given me a great deal already. " He knitted his brows. "So, you're a music lover. I find
it nauseating to be crazy about music. " I did not let him intimidate me. "I have listened to you often, back
there in the church, " I said. "But I don't want to trouble you. I thought I might find something, something
special; I really don't know what. But don't pay any attention to me. I can listen to you in church. " "But I
always lock it. " "Not very long ago you forgot and I sat inside. Usually I stand outside or sit on the curb. "
"Really? Next time you can come inside, it's warmer. All you have to do is knock at the door. But you have to
bang hard and not while I'm playing. Go ahead now--what did you want to tell me? You're quite young yet,
probably a student of some sort. Are you a musician?" "No. I like listening to music, but only the kind you
play, completely unreserved music, the kind that makes you feel that a man is shaking heaven and hell. I
believe I love that kind of music because it is amoral. Everything else is so moral that I'm looking for
something that isn't. Morality has always seemed to me insufferable. I can't express it very well. --Do you
know that there must be a god who is both god and devil at one and the same time? There is supposed to have
been one once. I heard about it. " The musician pushed his wide hat back a little and shook the hair out of his
eyes, all the while peering at me. He lowered his face across the table. Softly and expectantly he asked:
"What's the name of the god you mentioned?" "Unfortunately I know next to nothing about him, actually only
his name. He is called Abraxas. " The musician blinked suspiciously around him as though someone might be
eavesdropping. Then he moved closer to me and said in a whisper: "That's what I thought. Who are you?" "A
student at the prep school. " "How did you happen to hear about Abraxas?" "By accident. " He struck the
table so that wine spilled out of his glass. "By accident! Don't talkshit, young fellow! One doesn't hear about
Abraxas by accident, and don't you forget it. I will tell you more about him. I know a little. " He fell silent and
moved his chair back. When I looked at him full of expectation, he made a face. "Not here. Some other time.
There, take these. " He reached in his coat, which he had not taken off, and drew out a few roasted chestnuts
and threw them to me. I said nothing, took them, ate and felt content. "All right, " he whispered after a
moment. "Where did you find out about--Him?" I did not hesitate to tell him. "I was alone and desperate at
one time, " I began. "Then I remembered a friend I had had several years back who I felt knew much more
than I did. I had painted something, a bird struggling out of the globe. I sent him this painting. After a time I
found a piece of paper with the following words written on it: "The bird fights its way out of the egg. The egg
is the world. Who would be born must first destroy a world. The bird flies to God. That God's name is
Abraxas. '" He made no reply. We shelled our chestnuts and drank our wine. "Another glass?" he asked.
"No, thanks. I don't like drinking. " He laughed, a little disappointed. "As you like. It's different with me. I'll

stay but you can run along if you want. " When I joined him the next time, after he had played the organ, he
was not very communicative. He led me down an alley and through an old and impressive house and up to a
large, somewhat dark and neglected room. Except for a piano, nothing in it gave a hint of his being a
musician--but a large bookcase and a desk gave the room an almost scholarly air. "How many books you
have!" I exclaimed. "Part of them are from my father's library--in whose house I live. Yes, young man, I'm
living with my parents but I can't introduce you to them. My acquaintances aren't regarded very favorably in
this house. I'm the black sheep. My father is fabulously respectable and an important pastor and preacher in
this town. And I, so that you know the score at once, am his talented and promising son who has gone astray
and, to some extent, even mad. I was a theology student but shortly before my state exams I left this very
respectable department; that is, not entirely, not in so far as it concerns my private studies, for I'm still most
interested to see what kinds of gods people have devised for themselves. Otherwise, I'm a musician at present
and it looks as though I will receive a small post as an organist somewhere. Then I'll be back in the employ of
the church again. " As much as the feeble light from the small table lamp permitted, I glanced along the
spines of the books and noticed Greek, Latin, and Hebrew titles. Meanwhile my acquaintance had lain down
on the floor and was busying himself with something. "Come, " he called after a moment, "we want to
practice a bit of philosophy. That means: keep your mouth shut, lie on your stomach, and meditate. " He
struck a match and lit paper and wood in the fireplace in front of which he sprawled. The flames leapt high, he
stirred and fed them with the greatest care. I lay down beside him on the worn-out carpet. For about an hour
we lay on our stomachs silent before the shimmering wood, watching the flames shoot up and roar, sink down
and double over, flicker and twitch, and in the end brood quietly on sunken embers. "Fire worship was by no
means the most foolish thing ever invented, " he murmured to himself at one point. Otherwise neither of us
said a word. I stared fixedly into the flames, lost myself in dreams and stillness, recognized figures in the
smoke and pictures in the ashes. Once I was startled. My companion threw a piece of resin into the embers: a
slim flame shot up and I recognized the bird with the yellow sparrow hawk's head. In the dying embers, red
and gold threads ran together into nets, letters of the alphabet appeared, memories of faces, animals, plants,
worms, and snakes. As I emerged from my reveries I looked at my companion, his chin resting on his fists,
staring fanatically into the ashes with complete surrender. "I have to go now, " I said softly. "Go ahead then.
Good-by. " He did not get up. The lamp had gone out: I groped my way through the dark rooms and hallways
of the bewitched old house. Once outside, I stopped and looked up along its façade. Every window was dark.
A small brass plate on the front door gleamed in the light from a street lamp. On it I read the words: "Pistorius,
pastor primarius. " Not until I was at home and sat in my little room after supper did it occur to me that I had
not heard anything about either Abraxas or Pistorius--we'd exchanged hardly a dozen words. But I was very
satisfied with my visit. And for our next meeting he had promised to play an exquisite piece of old music, an
organ passacaglia by Buxtehude. Without my being entirely aware of it, the organist Pistorius had given me
my first lesson when we were sprawled on the floor before the fire in his depressing hermit's room. Staring
into the blaze had been a tonic for me, confirming tendencies that I had always had but never cultivated.
Gradually some of them were becoming comprehensible to me. Even as a young boy I had been in the habit
of gazing at bizarre natural phenomena, not so much observing them as surrendering to their magic, their
confused, deep language. Long gnarled tree roots, colored veins in rocks, patches of oil floating on water,
light-refracting flaws in glass--all these things had held great magic for me at one time: water and fire
particularly, smoke, clouds, and dust, but most of all the swirling specks of color that swam before my eyes
the minute I closed them. I began to remember all this in the days after my visit to Pistorius, for I noticed that
a certain strength and joy, an intensification of my self-awareness that I had felt since that evening, I owed
exclusively to this prolonged staring into the fire. It was remarkably comforting and rewarding. To the few
experiences which helped me along the way toward my life's true goal I added this new one: the observation
of such configurations. The surrender to Nature's irrational, strangely confused formations produces in us a
feeling of inner harmony with the force responsible for these phenomena. We soon fall prey to the temptation
of thinking of them as being our own moods, our own creations, and see the boundaries separating us from
Nature begin to quiver and dissolve. We become acquainted with that state of mind in which we are unable to
decide whether the images on our retina are the result of impressions coming from without or from within.
Nowhere as in this exercise can we discover so easily and simply to what extent we are creative, to what
extent our soul partakes of the constant creation of the world. For it is the same indivisible divinity that is
active through us and in Nature, and if the outside world were to be destroyed, a single one of us would be

capable of rebuilding it: mountain and stream, tree and leaf, root and flower, yes, every natural form is latent
within us, originates in the soul whose essence is eternity, whose essence we cannot know but which most
often intimates itself to us as the power to love and create. Not until many years later did I find these
observations of mine confirmed, in a book by Leonardo da Vinci, who describes at one point how good, how
intensely interesting it is to look at a wall many people have spit on. Confronted with each stain on the wet
wall, he must have felt the same as Pistorius and I felt before the fire. The next time we were together, the
organist gave me an explanation: "We always define the limits of our personality too narrowly. In general, we
count as part of our personality only that which we can recognize as being an individual trait or as diverging
from the norm. But we consist of everything the world consists of, each of us, and just as our body contains
the genealogical table of evolution as far back as the fish and even much further, so we bear everything in our
soul that once was alive in the soul of men. Every god and devil that ever existed, be it among the Greeks,
Chinese, or Zulus, are within us, exist as latent possibilities, as wishes, as alternatives. If the human race were
to vanish from the face of the earth save for one halfway talented child that had received no education, this
child would rediscover the entire course of evolution, it would be capable of producing everything once more,
gods and demons, paradises, commandments, the Old and New Testament. " "Yes, fine, " I replied. "But what
is the value of the individual in that case? Why do we continue striving if everything has been completed
within us?" "Stop!" exclaimed Pistorius. "There's an immense difference between simply carrying the world
within us and being aware of it. A madman can spout ideas that remind you of Plato, and a pious little
seminary student rethinks deep mythological correspondences found among the Gnostics or in Zoroaster. But
he isn't aware of them. He is a tree or stone, at best an animal, as long as he is not conscious. But as soon as
the first spark of recognition dawns within him he is a human being. You wouldn't consider all the bipeds you
pass on the street human beings simply because they walk upright and carry their young in their bellies nine
months! It is obvious how many of them are fish or sheep, worms or angels, how many are ants, how many are
bees! Well, each one of them contains the possibility of becoming human, but only by having an intimation of
these possibilities, partially even by learning to make himself conscious of them; only in this respect are these
possibilities his. " This was the general drift of our conversations. They rarely confronted me with anything
completely new, anything altogether astonishing. But everything, even the most ordinary matters, resembled
gentle persistent hammer blows on the same spot within me; all of them helped me to form myself, all of them
helped to peel off layers of skin, to break eggshells, and after each blow I lifted my head a little higher, a little
more freely, until my yellow bird pushed its beautiful raptor's head out of the shattered shell of the terrestrial
globe. Frequently we also told each other our dreams. Pistorius knew how to interpret them. An example of
this comes to mind just now. I dreamed I was able to fly, but in such a way that I seemed catapulted into the
air and lost all control. The feeling of flying exhilarated me, but exhilaration turned to fear when I saw myself
driven higher and higher, becoming more and more powerless. At that instant I made the saving discovery that
I could regulate the rise or fall of my flight by holding or releasing my breath. Pistorius' comment was: "The
impetus that makes you fly is our great human possession. Everybody has it. It is the feeling of being linked
with the roots of power, but one soon becomes afraid of this feeling. It's damned dangerous! That is why most
people shed their wings and prefer to walk and obey the law. But not you. You go on flying. And look! You
discover that you gradually begin to master your flight, that to the great general force that tears you upward
there is added a delicate, small force of your own, an organ, a steering mechanism. How marvelous! Lacking
that, you would be drawn up to the heights, powerless--which is what happens to madmen. They possess
deeper intimations than people who remain earth-bound, but they have no key and no steering mechanism and
roar off into infinity. But you, Sinclair, you are going about it the right way. How? You probably don't know
yourself. You are doing it with a new organ, with something that regulates your breathing. And now you will
realize how little 'individuality' your soul has in its deepest reaches. For it does not invent this regulator! It is
not new! You've borrowed it: it has existed for thousands of years. It is the organ with which fish regulate
their equilibrium--the air bladder. And in fact among the fish there are still a few strange primeval genera
where the air bladder functions as a kind of lung and can be used on occasion as a breathing mechanism. In
other words, exactly like the lung which you in your dream use as a flying bladder. " He even brought out a
zoology book and showed me the names and illustrations of these anachronistic fish. And with a peculiar
shudder I felt that an organ from an earlier period of evolution was still alive within me.
6) Jacob Wrestling

It is impossible to recount briefly all that Pistorius the eccentric musician told me about Abraxas. Most
important was that what I learned from him represented a further step on the road toward myself. At that time,
I was an unusual young man of eighteen, precocious in a hundred ways, in a hundred others immature and
helpless. When I compared myself with other boys my age I often felt proud and conceited but just as often
humiliated and depressed. Frequently I considered myself a genius, and just as frequently, crazy. I did not
succeed in participating in the life of boys my age, was often consumed by self-reproach and worries: I was
helplessly separated from them, I was debarred from life. Pistorius, who was himself a full-grown eccentric,
taught me to maintain my courage and self-respect. By always finding something of value in what I said, in
my dreams, my fantasies and thoughts, by never making light of them, always giving them serious
consideration, he became my model. "You told me, " he said, "that you love music because it isamoral. That's
all right with me. But in that case you can't allow yourself to be a moralist either. You can't compare yourself
with others: if Nature has made you a bat you shouldn't try to be an ostrich. You consider yourself odd at
times, you accuse yourself of taking a road different from most people. You have to unlearn that. Gaze into the
fire, into the clouds, and as soon as the inner voices begin to speak, surrender to them, don't ask first whether
it's permitted or would please your teachers or father, or some god. You will ruin yourself if you do that. That
way you will become earthbound, a vegetable. Sinclair, our god's name is Abraxas and he is God and Satan
and he contains both the luminous and the dark world. Abraxas does not take exception to any of your
thoughts, any of your dreams. Never forget that. But he will leave you once you've become blameless and
normal. Then he will leave you and look for a different vessel in which to brew his thoughts. " Among all my
dreams the dark dream of love was the most faithful. How often I dreamed that I stepped beneath the heraldic
bird into our house, wanted to draw my mother to me and instead held the great, half-male, half-maternal
woman in my arms, of whom I was afraid but who also attracted me violently. And I could never confess this
dream to my friend. I kept it to myself even after I had told him everything else. It was my corner, my secret,
my refuge. When I felt bad I asked Pistorius to play Buxtehude's passacaglia. Then I would sit in the
dusk-filled church completely involved in this unusually intimate, self-absorbed music, music that seemed to
listen to itself, that comforted me each time, prepared me more and more to heed my own inner voices. At
times we stayed even after the music had ceased: we watched the weak light filter through the high, sharply
arched windows and lose itself in the church. "It sounds odd, " said Pistorius, "that I was a theology student
once and almost became a pastor. But I only committed a mistake of form. My task and goal still is to be a
priest. Yet I was satisfied too soon and offered myself to Jehovah before I knew about Abraxas. Oh, yes, each
and every religion is beautiful; religion is soul, no matter whether you take part in Christian communion or
make a pilgrimage to Mecca. " "But in that case, " I intervened, "you actually could have become a pastor. "
"No, Sinclair. I would have had to lie. Our religion is practiced as though it were something else, something
totally ineffectual. If worst came to worst I might become a Catholic, but a Protestant pastor--no! The few
genuine believers--I do know a few--prefer the literal interpretation. I would not be able to tell them, for
example, that Christ is not a person for me but a hero, a myth, an extraordinary shadow image in which
humanity has painted itself on the wall of eternity. And the others, that come to church to hear a few clever
phrases, to fulfill an obligation, not to miss anything, and so forth, what should I have said to them? Convert
them? Is that what you mean? But I have no desire to. A priest does not want to convert, he merely wants to
live among believers, among his own kind. He wants to be the instrument and expression for the feeling from
which we create our gods. " He interrupted himself. Then continued: "My friend, our new religion, for which
we have chosen the name Abraxas, is beautiful. It is the best we have. But it is still a fledgling. Its wings
haven't grown yet. A lonely religion isn't right either. There has to be a community, there must be a cult and
intoxicants, feasts and mysteries... " He sank into a reverie and became lost within himself. "Can't one
perform mysteries all by oneself or among a very small group?" I asked hesitantly. "Yes, one can. " He
nodded. "I've been performing them for a long time by myself. I have cults of my own for which I would be
sentenced to years in prison if anyone should ever find out about them. Still, I know that it's not the right thing
either. " Suddenly he slapped me on the shoulder so that I started up. "Boy, " he said intensely, "you, too,
have mysteries of your own. I know that you must have dreams that you don't tell me. I don't want to know
them. But I can tell you: live those dreams, play with them, build altars to them. It is not yet the ideal but it
points in the right direction. Whether you and I and a few others will renew the world someday remains to be
seen. But within ourselves we must renew it each day, otherwise we just aren't serious. Don't forget that! You

are eighteen years old, Sinclair, you don't go running to prostitutes. You must have dreams of love, you must
have desires. Perhaps you're made in such a way that you are afraid of them. Don't be. They are the best things
you have. You can believe me. I lost a great deal when I was your age by violating those dreams of love. One
shouldn't do that. When you know something about Abraxas, you cannot do this any longer. You aren't
allowed to be afraid of anything, you can't consider prohibited anything that the soul desires. " Startled, I
countered: "But you can't do everything that comes to your mind! You can't kill someone because you detest
him. " He moved closer to me. "Under certain circumstances, even that. Yet it is a mistake most of the time. I
don't mean that you should simply do everything that pops into your head. No. But you shouldn't harm and
drive away those ideas that make good sense by exorcising them or moralizing about them. Instead of
crucifying yourself or someone else you can drink wine from a chalice and contemplate the mystery of the
sacrifice. Even without such procedures you can treat your drives and so-called temptations with respect and
love. Then they will reveal their meaning--and they all do have meaning. If you happen to think of something
truly mad or sinful again, if you want to kill someone or want to commit some enormity, Sinclair, think at that
moment that it is Abraxas fantasizing within you! The person whom you would like to do away with is of
course never Mr. X but merely a disguise. If you hate a person, you hate something in him that is part of
yourself. What isn't part of ourselves doesn't disturb us. " Never before had Pistorius said anything to me that
had touched me as deeply as this. I could not reply. But what had affected me most and in the strangest way
was the similarity of this exhortation to Demian's words, which I had been carrying around with me for years.
They did not know each other, yet both of them had told me the same tiling. "The things we see, " Pistorius
said softly, "are the same things that are within us. There is no reality except the one contained within us. That
is why so many people live such an unreal life. They take the images outside them for reality and never allow
the world within to assert itself. You can be happy that way. But once you know the other interpretation you
no longer have the choice of following the crowd. Sinclair, the majority's path is an easy one, ours is difficult.
" A few days later, after I had twice waited in vain, I met him late at night as he came seemingly blown
around a corner by the cold night wind, stumbling all over himself, dead drunk. I felt no wish to call him. He
went past me without seeing me, staring in front of himself with bewildered eyes shining, as though he
followed something darkly calling out of the unknown. I followed him the length of one street; he drifted
along as though pulled by an invisible string, with a fanatic gait, yet loose, like a ghost. Sadly I returned home
to my unfulfilled dreams. So that is how he renews the world within himself! it occurred to me. At the same
moment I felt that was a low, moralizing thought. What did I know of his dreams? Perhaps he walked a more
certain path in his intoxication than I within my dream. I had noticed a few times during the breaks between
classes that a fellow student I had never paid any previous attention to seemed to seek me out. He was a
delicate, weak-looking boy with thin red-blond hair, and the look in his eyes and his behavior seemed unusual.
One evening when I was coming home he was lying in wait for me in the alley. He let me walk past, then
followed me and stopped when I did before the front door. "Is there something you want from me?" I asked
him. "I would only like to talk with you once, " he said shyly. "Be so kind as to walk with me for a moment. "
I followed him, sensing that he was excited and full of expectation. His hands trembled. "Are you a
spiritualist?" he asked suddenly. "No, Knauer, " I said laughing. "Not in the least What makes you think I
am?" "But then you must be a theosophist?" "Neither. " "Oh, don't be so reticent! I can feel there's
something special about you. There's a look in your eyes... I'm positive you communicate with spirits. I'm not
asking out of idle curiosity, Sinclair. No, I am a seeker myself, you know, and I'm so very alone. " "Go ahead,
tell me about it, " I encouraged him. "I don't know much about spirits. I live in my dreams--that's what you
sense. Other people live in dreams, but not in their own. That's the difference. " "Yes, maybe that's the way it
is, " he whispered. "It doesn't matter what kinds of dreams they are in which you live. --Have you heard about
white magic?" I had to say no. "That is when you learn self-control. You can become immortal and bewitch
people. Have you ever practiced any exercises?" After I had inquired what these "exercises" were he became
very secretive; that is, until I turned to go back. Then he told me everything. "For instance, when I want to fall
asleep or want to concentrate on something I do one of these exercises. I think of something, a word for
example, or a name or a geometrical form. Then I think this form into myself as hard as I can. I try to imagine
it until I can actually feel it inside my head. Then I think it in the throat, and so forth, until I am completely
filled by it. Then I'm as firm as though I had turned to stone and nothing can distract me any more. " I had a
vague idea of what he meant. Yet I felt certain that there was something else troubling him, he was so
strangely excited and restless. I tried to make it easy for him to speak, and it was not long before he expressed

his real concern. "You're continent, too, aren't you?" he asked reluctantly. "What do you mean, sexually?"
"Yes. I've been continent for two years--ever since I found out about the exercises. I had been depraved until
then, you know what I mean. --So you've never been with a woman?" "No, " I said. "I never found the right
one. " "But if you did find a woman that you felt was the right one, would you sleep with Her?" "Yes,
naturally--if she had no objections, " I said a little derisively. "Oh, you're on the wrong path altogether! You
can train your inner powers only if you're completely continent. I've been--for two whole years. Two years and
a little more than a month! It's so difficult! Sometimes I think I can't stand it much longer. " "Listen, Knauer, I
don't believe that continence is all that important. " "I know, " he objected. "That's what they all say. But I
didn't expect you to say the same thing. If you want to take the higher, the spiritual road you have to remain
absolutely pure. " "Well, be pure then! But I don't understand why someone is supposed to be more pure than
another person if he suppresses his sexual urges. Or are you capable of eliminating sex from all your thoughts
and dreams?" He looked at me despairingly. "No, that's just the point. My God, but I have to. I have dreams
at night that I couldn't even tell myself. Horrible dreams. " I remembered what Pistorius had told me. But
much as I agreed with his ideas I could not pass them on. I was incapable of giving advice that did not derive
from my own experience and which I myself did not have the strength to follow. I fell silent and felt
humiliated at being unable to give advice to someone who was seeking it from me. "I've tried everything!"
moaned Knauer beside me. "I've done everything there is to do. Cold water, snow, physical exercise and
running, but nothing helps. Each night I awake from dreams that I'm not even allowed to think about--and the
horrible part is that in the process I'm gradually forgetting everything spiritual I ever learned. I hardly ever
succeed any more in concentrating or in making myself fall asleep. Often I lie awake the whole night. It can't
go on much longer like this. If I can't win the struggle, if in the end I give in and become impure again, I'll be
more wicked than all the others who never put up a fight. You understand that, don't you?" I nodded but was
unable to make any comment. He began to bore me and I was startled that his evident need and despair made
no deeper impression on me. My only feeling was: I can't help you. "So you don't know anything?" he finally
asked sadly and exhausted. "Nothing at all? But there must be a way. How do you do it?" "I can't tell you
anything, Knauer. We can't help anybody else. No one helped me either. You have to come to terms with
yourself and then you must do what your inmost heart desires. There is no other way. If you can't find it
yourself you'll find no spirits either. " The little fellow looked at me, disappointed and suddenly bereft of
speech. Then his eyes flashed with hatred, he grimaced and shrieked: "Ah, you're a fine saint! You're depraved
yourself, I know. You pretend to be wise but secretly you cling to the same filth the rest of us do! You're a pig,
a pig, like me. All of us are pigs!" I went off and left him standing there. He followed me two or three steps,
then turned around and ran away. I felt nauseated with pity and disgust and the feeling did not leave me until I
had surrounded myself with several paintings back in my room and surrendered to my own dreams. Instantly
the dream returned, of the house entrance and the coat of arms, of the mother and the strange woman, and I
could see her features so distinctly that I began painting her picture that same evening. When the painting was
completed after several days' work, sketched out in dreamlike fifteen-minute spurts, I pinned it on the wall,
moved the study lamp in front of it, and stood before it as though before a ghost with which I had had to
struggle to the end. It was a face similar to the earlier one--a few features even resembled me. One eye was
noticeably higher than the other and the gaze went over and beyond me, self-absorbed and rigid, full of fate. I
stood before it and began to freeze inside from the exertion. I questioned the painting, berated it, made love to
it, prayed to it; I called it mother, called it whore and slut, called it my beloved, called it Abraxas. Words said
by Pistorius--or Demian?--occurred to me between my imprecations. I could not remember who had said them
but I felt I could hear them again. They were words about Jacob's wrestling with the angel of God and his "I
will not let thee go except thou bless me. " The painted face in the lamplight changed with each
exhortation--became light and luminous, dark and brooding, closed pale eyelids over dead eyes, opened them
again and flashed lightning glances. It was woman, man, girl, a little child, an animal, it dissolved into a tiny
patch of color, grew large and distinct again. Finally, following a strong impulse, I closed my eyes and now
saw the picture within me, stronger and mightier than before. I wanted to kneel down before it but it was so
much a part of me that I could not separate it from myself, as though it had been transformed into my own
ego. Then I heard a dark, heavy roaring as if just before a spring storm and I trembled with an indescribable
new feeling of fearful experience. Stars flashed up before me and died away: memories as far back as my
earliest forgotten childhood, yes, even as far back as my pre-existence at earlier stages of evolution, thronged
past me. But these memories that seemed to repeat every secret of my life to me did not stop with the past and

the present. They went beyond it, mirroring the future, tore me away from the present into new forms of life
whose images shone blindingly clear--not one could I clearly remember later on. During the night I awoke
from deep sleep: still dressed I lay diagonally across the bed. I lit the lamp, felt that I had to recollect
something important but could not remember anything about the previous hour. Gradually I began to have an
inkling. I looked for the painting--it was no longer on the wall, nor on the table either. Then I thought I could
dimly remember that I had burned it. Or had this been in my dream that I burned it in the palm of my hand and
swallowed the ashes? A great restlessness overcame me. I put on a hat and walked out of the house through
the alley as though compelled, ran through innumerable streets and squares as though driven by a frenzy,
listened briefly in front of my friend's dark church, searched, searched with extreme urgency--without
knowing what. I walked through a quarter with brothels where I could still see here and there a lighted
window. Farther on I reached an area of newly built houses, with piles of bricks everywhere partially covered
with gray snow. I remembered--as I drifted under the sway of some strange compulsion like a sleepwalker
through the streets--the new building back in my home town to which my tormentor Kromer had taken me for
my first payment. A similar building stood before me now in the gray night, its dark entrance yawning at me.
It drew me inside: wanting to escape I stumbled over sand and rubbish. The power that drove me was stronger:
I was forced to enter. Across boards and bricks I stumbled into a dreary room that smelled moist and cold
from fresh cement. There was a pile of sand, a light-gray patch, otherwise it was dark. Then a horrified voice
called out: "My God, Sinclair, where did you come from?" Beside me a figure rose up out of the darkness, a
small lean fellow, like a ghost, and even in my terror I recognized my fellow student Knauer. "How did you
happen to come here?" he asked, mad with excitement. "How were you able to find me?" I didn't understand.
"I wasn't looking for you, " I said, benumbed. Each word meant a great effort and came only haltingly,
through dead lips. He stared at me. "Weren't looking for me?" "No. Something drew me. Did you call me?
You must have called me. What are you doing here anyway? It's night. " He clasped me convulsively with his
thin arms. "Yes, night. Morning will soon be here. Can you forgive me?" "Forgive you what?" "Oh, I was so
awful. " Only now I remembered our conversation. Had that been only four, five days ago? A whole lifetime
seemed to have passed since then. But suddenly I knew everything. Not only what had transpired between us
but also why I had come here and what Knauer had wanted to do out here. "You wanted to commit suicide,
Knauer?" He trembled with cold and fear. "Yes, I wanted to. I don't know whether I would have been able to.
I wanted to wait until morning. " I drew him into the open. The first horizontal rays of daylight glimmered
cold and listless in the gray dawn. For a while I led the boy by the arm. I heard myself say: "Now go home
and don't say a word to anyone! You were on the wrong path. We aren't pigs as you seem to think, but human
beings. We create gods and struggle with them, and they bless us. " We walked on and parted company
without saying another word. When I reached the house, it was already daylight. The best things I gained
from my remaining weeks in St. ------were the hours spent with Pistorius at the organ or in front of his fire.
We were studying a Greek text about Abraxas and he read me extracts from a translation of the Vedas and
taught me how to speak the sacred "om. " Yet these occult matters were not what nourished me inwardly.
What invigorated me was the progress I had made in discovering my self, the increasing confidence in my
own dreams, thoughts, and intimations, and the growing knowledge of the power I possessed within me.
Pistorius and I understood each other in every possible way. All I had to do was think of him and I could be
certain that he--or a message from him--would come. I could ask him anything, as I had asked Demian,
without his having to be present in the flesh: all I had to do was visualize him and direct my questions at him
in the form of intensive thought. Then all psychic effort expended on the question would return to me in kind,
as an answer. Only it was not the person of Pistorius nor that of Max Demian that I conjured up and addressed,
but the picture I had dreamed and painted, the half-male, half-female dream image of my daemon. This being
was now no longer confined to my dreams, no longer merely depicted on paper, but lived within me as an
ideal and intensification of my self. The relationship which the would-be suicide Knauer formed with me was
peculiar, occasionally even funny. Ever since the night in which I had been sent to him, he clung to me like a
faithful servant or a dog, made every effort to forge his life with mine, and obeyed me blindly. He came to me
with the most astonishing questions and requests, wanted to see spirits, learn the cabala, and would not believe
me when I assured him that I was totally ignorant in all these matters. He thought nothing was beyond my
powers. Yet it was strange that he would often come to me with his puzzling and stupid questions when I was
faced with a puzzle of my own to which his fanciful notions and requests frequently provided a catchword and
the impetus for a solution. Often he was a bother and I would dismiss him peremptorily; yet I sensed that he,

too, had been sent to me, that from him, too, came back whatever I gave him, in double measure; he, too, was
a leader for me--or at least a guidepost. The occult books and writings he brought me and in which he sought
his salvation taught me more than I realized at the time. Later Knauer slipped unnoticed out of my life. We
never came into conflict with each other; there was no reason to. Unlike Pistorius, with whom I was still to
share a strange experience toward the end of my days in St. On one or on several occasions in the course of
their lives, even the most harmless people do not altogether escape coming into conflict with the fine virtues
of piety and gratitude. Sooner or later each of us must take the step that separates him from his father, from his
mentors; each of us must have some cruelly lonely experience--even if most people cannot take much of this
and soon crawl back. I myself had not parted from my parents and their world, the "luminous" world in a
violent struggle, but had gradually and almost imperceptibly become estranged. I was sad that it had to be this
way and it made for many unpleasant hours during my visits back home; but it did not affect me deeply, it was
bearable. But where we have given of our love and respect not from habit but of our own free will, where we
have been disciples and friends out of our inmost hearts, it is a bitter and horrible moment when we suddenly
recognize that the current within us wants to pull us away from what is dearest to us. Then every thought that
rejects the friend and mentor turns in our own hearts like a poisoned barb, then each blow struck in defense
flies back into one's own face, the words "disloyalty" and "ingratitude" strike the person who feels he was
morally sound like catcalls and stigma, and the frightened heart flees timidly back to the charmed valleys of
childhood virtues, unable to believe that this break, too, must be made, this bond also broken. With time my
inner feelings had slowly turned against acknowledging Pistorius so unreservedly as a master. My friendship
with him, his counsel, the comfort he had brought me, his proximity had been a vital experience during the
most important months of my adolescence. God had spoken to me through him. From his lips my dreams had
returned clarified and interpreted. He had given me faith in myself. And now I became conscious of gradually
beginning to resist him. There was too much didacticism in what he said, and I felt that he understood only a
part of me completely. No quarrel or scene occurred between us, no break and not even a settling of accounts.
I uttered only a single--actually harmless--phrase, yet it was in that moment that an illusion was shattered. A
vague presentiment of such an occurrence had oppressed me for some time; it became a distinct feeling one
Sunday morning in his study. We were lying before the fire while he was holding forth about mysteries and
forms of religion, which he was studying, and whose potentialities for the future preoccupied him. All this
seemed to me odd and eclectic and not of vital importance; there was something vaguely pedagogical about it;
it sounded like tedious research among the ruins of former worlds. And all at once I felt a repugnance for his
whole manner, for this cult of mythologies, this game of mosaics he was playing with secondhand modes of
belief. "Pistorius, " I said suddenly in a fit of malice that both surprised and frightened me. "You ought to tell
me one of your dreams again sometime, a real dream, one that you've had at night. What you're telling me
there is all so--so damnedantiquarian. " He had never heard me speak like that before and at the same moment
I realized with a flash of shame and horror that the arrow I had shot at him, that had pierced his heart, had
come from his own armory: I was now flinging back at him reproaches that on occasion he had directed
against himself half in irony. He fell silent at once. I looked at him with dread in my heart and saw him
turning terribly pale. After a long pregnant pause he placed fresh wood on the fire and said in a quiet voice:
"You're right, Sinclair, you're a clever boy. I'll spare you the antiquarian stuff from now on. " He spoke very
calmly but it was obvious he was hurt. What had I done? I wanted to say something encouraging to him,
implore his forgiveness, assure him of my love and my deep gratitude. Touching words came to mind--but I
could not utter them. I just lay there gazing into the fire and kept silent. He, too, kept silent and so we lay
while the fire dwindled, and with each dying flame I felt something beautiful, intimate irrevocably burn low
and become evanescent. "I'm afraid you've misunderstood me, " I said finally with a very forced and clipped
voice. The stupid, meaningless words fell mechanically from my lips as if I were reading from a magazine
serial. "I quite understand, " Pistorius said softly. "You're right. " I waited. Then he went on slowly:
"Inasmuch as one person can be rightagainst another. " No, no! I'm wrong, a voice screamed inside me--but I
could not say anything. I knew that with my few words I had put my finger on his essential weakness, his
affliction and wound. I had touched the spot where he most mistrusted himself. His ideal way "antiquarian, "
he was seeking in the past, he was a romantic. And suddenly I realized deeply within me: what Pistorius had
been and given to me was precisely what he could not be and give to himself. He had led me along a path that
would transcend and leave even him, the leader, behind. God knows how one happens to say something like
that. I had not meant it all that maliciously, had had no idea of the havoc I would create. I had uttered

something the implications of which I had been unaware of at the moment of speaking. I had succumbed to a
weak, rather witty but malicious impulse and it had become fate. I had committed a trivial and careless act of
brutality which he regarded as a judgment. How much I wished then that he become enraged, defend himself,
and berate me! He did nothing of the kind--I had to do all of that myself. He would have smiled if he could
have, and the fact that he found it impossible was the surest proof of how deeply I had wounded him. By
accepting this blow so quietly, from me, his impudent and ungrateful pupil, by keeping silent and admitting
that I had been right, by acknowledging my words as his fate, he made me detest myself and increased my
indiscretion even more. When I had hit out I had thought I would strike a tough, well-armed man--he turned
out to be a quiet, passive, defenseless creature who surrendered without protest. For a long time we stayed in
front of the dying fire, in which each glowing shape, each writhing twig reminded me of our rich hours and
increased the guilty awareness of my indebtedness to Pistorius. Finally I could bear it no longer. I got up and
left. I stood a long time in front of the door to his room, a long time on the dark stairway, and even longer
outside his house waiting to hear if he would follow me. Then I turned to go and walked for hours through the
town, its suburbs, parks and woods, until evening. During that walk I felt for the first time the mark of Cain on
my forehead. Only gradually was I able to think clearly about what had occurred. At first my thoughts were
full of self-reproach, intent on defending Pistorius. But all of them turned into the opposite of my intention. A
thousand times I was ready to regret and take back my rash statement--yet it had been the truth. Only now I
managed to understand Pistorius completely and succeeded in constructing his whole dream before me. This
dream had been to be a priest, to proclaim the new religion, to introduce new forms of exaltation, of love, of
worship, to erect new symbols. But this was not his strength and it was not his function. He lingered too
fondly in the past, his knowledge of this past was too precise, he knew too much about Egypt and India,
Mithras and Abraxas. His love was shackled to images the earth had seen before, and yet, in his inmost heart,
he realized that the New had to be truly new and different, that it had to spring from fresh soil and could not be
drawn from museums and libraries. His function was perhaps to lead men to themselves as he had led me. To
provide them with the unprecedented, the new gods, was not in him. At this point a sharp realization burned
within me: each man has his "function" but none which he can choose himself, define, or perform as he
pleases. It was wrong to desire new gods, completely wrong to want to provide the world with something. An
enlightened man had but one duty--to seek the way to himself, to reach inner certainty, to grope his way
forward, no matter where it led. The realization shook me profoundly, it was the fruit of this experience. I had
often speculated with images of the future, dreamed of roles that I might be assigned, perhaps as poet or
prophet or painter, or something similar. All that was futile. I did not exist to write poems, to preach or to
paint, neither I nor anyone else. All of that was incidental. Each man had only one genuine vocation--to find
the way to himself. He might end up as poet or madman, as prophet or criminal--that was not his affair,
ultimately it was of no concern. His task was to discover his own destiny--not an arbitrary one--and live it out
wholly and resolutely within himself. Everything else was only a would-be existence, an attempt at evasion, a
flight back to the ideals of the masses, conformity and fear of one's own inwardness. The new vision rose up
before me, glimpsed a hundred times, possibly even expressed before but now experienced for the first time by
me. I was an experiment on the part of Nature, a gamble within the unknown, perhaps for a new purpose,
perhaps for nothing, and my only task was to allow this game on the part of primeval depths to take its course,
to feel its will within me and make it wholly mine. That or nothing! I had already felt much loneliness, now
there was a deeper loneliness still which was inescapable. I made no attempt at reconciliation with Pistorius.
We remained friends but the relationship changed. Yet this was something we touched on only once; actually
it was Pistorius alone who did. He said: "You know that I have the desire to become a priest. Most of all I
wanted to become the priest of the new religion of which you and I have had so many intimations. That role
will never be mine--I realize that and even without wholly admitting it to myself have known it for some time.
So I will perform other priestly duties instead, perhaps at the organ, perhaps some other way. But I must
always have things around me that I feel are beautiful and sacred, organ music and mysteries, symbols and
myths. I need and cannot forgo them. That is my weakness. Sometimes, Sinclair, I know that I should not have
such wishes, that they are a weakness and luxury. It would be more magnanimous and just if I put myself
unreservedly at the disposal of fate. But I can't do that, I am incapable of it. Perhaps you will be able to do it
one day. It is difficult, it is the only truly difficult thing there is. I have often dreamed of doing so, but I can't;
the idea fills me with dread: I am not capable of standing so naked and alone. I, too, am a poor weak creature
who needs warmth and food and occasionally the comfort of human companionship. Someone who seeks

nothing but his own fate no longer has any companions, he stands quite alone and has only cold universal
space around him. That is Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, you know. There have been martyrs who gladly
let themselves be nailed to the cross, but even these were no heroes, were not liberated, for even they wanted
something that they had become fond of and accustomed to--they had models, they had ideals. But the man
who only seeks his destiny has neither models nor ideals, has nothing dear and consoling! And actually this is
the path one should follow. People like you and me are quite lonely really but we still have each other, we
have the secret satisfaction of being different, of rebelling, of desiring the unusual. But you must shed that,
too, if you want to go all the way to the end. You cannot allow yourself to become a revolutionary, an
example, a martyr. It is beyond imagining --" Yes, it was beyond imagining. But it could be dreamed,
anticipated, sensed. A few times I had a foretaste of it--in an hour of absolute stillness. Then I would gaze into
myself and confront the image of my fate. Its eyes would be full of wisdom, full of madness, they would
radiate love or deep malice, it was all the same. You were not allowed to choose or desire any one of them.
You were only allowed to desireyourself, only your fate. Up to this point, Pistorius had been my guide. In
those days I walked about as though I were blind. I felt frenzies--each step was a new danger. I saw nothing in
front of me except the unfathomable darkness into which all paths I had taken until now had led and vanished.
And within me I saw the image of the master, who resembled Demian, and in whose eyes my fate stood
written. I wrote on a piece of paper: "A leader has left me. I am enveloped in darkness. I cannot take another
step alone. Help me. " I wanted to mail it to Demian, but didn't. Each time I wanted to, it looked foolish and
senseless. But I knew my little prayer by heart and often recited it to myself. It was with me every hour of the
day. I had begun to understand it. My schooldays were over. I was to take a trip during my vacation--my
father's idea--and then enter a university. But I did not know what I would major in. I had been granted my
wish: one semester of philosophy. Any other subject would have done as well.
7) Eva
Once during my vacation I visited the house where years before Demian had lived with his mother. I saw an
old woman strolling in the garden and, speaking with her, learned that it was her house. I inquired after the
Demian family. She remembered them very well but could not tell me where they lived at present. Sensing my
interest she took me into the house, brought out a leather album and showed me a photo of Demian's mother. I
could hardly remember what she looked like, but now as I saw the small likeness my heart stood still: it was
my dream image! That was she, the tall, almost masculine woman who resembled her son, with maternal
traits, severity, passion; beautiful and alluring, beautiful and unapproachable, daemon and mother, fate and
beloved. There was no mistaking her! To discover in this fashion that my dream image existed struck me as a
miracle. So there was a woman who looked like that, who bore the features of my destiny! And to be Demian's
mother. Where was she? Shortly afterwards I embarked on my trip. What a strange journey it was! I traveled
restlessly from place to place, following every impulse, always searching for this woman. There were days
when everyone I met reminded me of her, echoed her, seemed to resemble her, drew me through the streets of
unfamiliar cities, through railroad stations and into trams, as in an intricate dream. There were other days
when I realized the futility of my search. Then I would idly sit somewhere in a park or in some hotel garden,
in a waiting room, trying to make the picture come alive within me. But it had become shy and elusive. I
found it impossible to fall asleep. Only while traveling on the train could I catch an occasional brief nap.
Once, in Zurich, a woman approached me, an impudent pretty creature. I took hardly any notice of her and
walked past as though she didn't exist. I would rather have died on the spot than have paid attention to another
woman, even for an hour. I felt my fate drawing me on, I felt the moment of my fulfillment coming near and I
was sick with impatience at not being able to do anything. Once in a railroad station, in Innsbruck I think, I
caught sight of a woman who reminded me of her--in a train just pulling away. I was miserable for days. And
suddenly the form reappeared in a dream one night. I awoke humiliated and dejected by the futility of my hunt
and I took the next train home. A few weeks later I enrolled at the university of H. I found everything
disappointing. The lectures on the history of philosophy were just as uninspired and stereotyped as the
activities of most of the students. Everything seemed to run according to an old pattern, everyone was doing
the same thing, and the exaggerated gaiety on the boyish faces looked depressingly empty and ready-made.
But at least I was free, I had the whole day to myself, lived quietly and peacefully in an old house near the
town wall, and on my table lay a few volumes of Nietzsche. I lived with him, sensed the loneliness of his soul,

perceived the fate that had propelled him on inexorably; I suffered with him, and rejoiced that there had been
one man who had followed his destiny so relentlessly. Late one evening I was sauntering through town. An
autumn wind was blowing and I could hear the fraternities frolic in the taverns. Clouds of tobacco smoke
drifted out open windows with a profusion of song, loud, rhythmic yet uninspired, lifelessly uniform. I stood
at a street corner and listened: out of two bars the methodically rehearsed gaiety of youth rang out against the
night. False communion everywhere, everywhere shedding the responsibility of fate, flight to the herd for
warmth. Two men slowly walked past behind me. I caught a few words of their conversation. "Isn't it just
like the young men's house in a kraal?" said one of them. "Everything fits down to the tattooing which is in
vogue again. Look, that's young Europe. " The voice sounded strangely and admonishingly familiar. I
followed the two of them down the dark lane. One of them was a Japanese, small and elegant. Under a street
lamp I saw his yellow face light up in a smile. The other was now speaking again. "I imagine it's just as bad
where you come from, in Japan. People that don't follow the herd are rare everywhere. There are some here
too. " I felt a mixture of alarm and joy at each word. I knew the speaker. It was Demian. I followed him and
the Japanese through the wind-swept streets; listening to their conversation I relished the sound of Demian's
voice. It still had its familiar ring; the same old beautiful certainty and calm had all their old power over me.
Now all was well. I had found him. At the end of a street in the suburbs the Japanese took his leave and
unlocked his house door. Demian retraced his steps, I had stopped and was waiting for him in the middle of
the street. I became very agitated as I saw him approach, upright, with elastic step, in a brown rubber raincoat.
He came closer without changing his pace until he stopped a few steps in front of me. Then he removed his hat
and revealed his old light-skinned face with the decisive mouth and the peculiar brightness on his broad
forehead. "Demian, " I called out. He stretched out his hand. "So, it's you, Sinclair! I was expecting you. "
"Did you know I was here?" "I didn't exactly know it but I definitely wished you were. I didn't catch sight of
you until this evening. You've been following us for quite some time. " "Did you recognize me at once?" "Of
course. You've changed somewhat. But you have the sign. " "The sign. What kind of sign?" "We used to call
it the mark of Cain earlier on--if you can still remember. It's our sign. You've always had it, that's why I
became your friend. But now it has become more distinct. " "I wasn't aware of that. Or actually, yes, once I
painted a picture of you, Demian, and was astonished that it also resembled myself. Was that the sign?" "That
was it. It's good that you're here. My mother will be pleased, too. " Suddenly I was frightened. "Your mother?
Is she here, too? But she doesn't know me. " "But she knows about you. She will recognize you even without
my saying who you are. We've been in the dark about you for a long time. " "I often wanted to write you, but
it was no use. I've known for some time that I would find you soon. I waited for it each day. " He thrust his
arm under mine and walked along with me. An aura of calm surrounded him which affected me, too. Soon we
were talking as we used to talk in the past. Our thoughts went back to our time in school, the Confirmation
classes and also to that last unhappy meeting during my vacation. Only our earliest and closest bond, the Franz
Kromer episode, was never mentioned. Suddenly we found ourselves in the midst of a strange conversation
touching on many ominous topics. Picking up where Demian left off in his conversation with the Japanese, we
had discussed the life most of the students led, then came to something else, something that seemed to lie far
afield. Yet in Demian's words an intimate connection became evident. He spoke about the spirit of Europe
and the signs of the times. Everywhere, he said, we could observe the reign of the herd instinct, nowhere
freedom and love. All this false communion--from the fraternities to the choral societies and the nations
themselves--was an inevitable development, was a community born of fear and dread, out of embarrassment,
but inwardly rotten, outworn, close to collapsing. "Genuine communion, " said Demian, "is a beautiful thing.
But what we see nourishing everywhere is nothing of the kind. The real spirit will come from the knowledge
that separate individuals have of one another and for a time it will transform the world. The community spirit
at present is only a manifestation of the herd instinct. Men fly into each other's arms because they are afraid of
each other--the owners are for themselves, the workers for themselves, the scholars for themselves! And why
are they afraid? You are only afraid if you are not in harmony with yourself. People are afraid because they
have never owned up to themselves. A whole society composed of men afraid of the unknown within them!
They all sense that the rules they live by are no longer valid, that they live according to archaic laws--neither
their religion nor their morality is in any way suited to the needs of the present. For a hundred years or more
Europe has done nothing but study and build factories! They know exactly how many ounces of powder it
takes to kill a man but they don't know how to pray to God, they don't even know how to be happy for a single
contented hour. Just take a look at a student dive! Or a resort where the rich congregate. It's hopeless. Dear

Sinclair, nothing good can come of all of this. These people who huddle together in fear are filled with dread
and malice, no one trusts the other. They hanker after ideals that are ideals no longer but they will hound the
man to death who sets up a new one. I can feel the approaching conflict. It's coming, believe me, and soon. Of
course it will not 'improve' the world. Whether the workers kill the manufacturers or whether Germany makes
war on Russia will merely mean a change of ownership. But it won't have been entirely in vain. It will reveal
the bankruptcy of present-day ideals, there will be a sweeping away of Stone Age gods. The world, as it is
now, wants to die, wants to perish--and it will. " "And what will happen to us during this conflict?" "To us?
Oh, perhaps we'll perish in it. Our kind can be shot, too. Only we aren't done away with as easily as all that.
Around what remains of us, around those of us who survive, the will of the future will gather. The will of
humanity, which our Europe has shouted down for a time with its frenzy of technology, will come to the fore
again. And then it will become clear that the will of humanity is nowhere--and never was--identical with the
will of present-day societies, states and peoples, clubs and churches. No, what Nature wants of man stands
indelibly written in the individual, in you, in me. It stood written in Jesus, it stood written in Nietzsche. These
tendencies--which are the only important ones and which, of course, can assume different forms every
day--will have room to breathe once the present societies have collapsed. " It was late when we stopped in
front of a garden by the river. 'This is where we live, " said Demian. "You must come visit us soon. We've
been waiting for you. " Elated I walked the long way home through a night which had now turned chill. Here
and there students were reeling noisily to their quarters. I had often marked the contrast between their almost
ludicrous gaiety and my lonely existence, sometimes with scorn, sometimes with a feeling of deprivation. But
never until today had I felt with as much calm and secret strength how little it mattered to me, how remote and
dead this world was for me. I remembered civil servants in my home town, worthy old gentlemen who clung
to the memories of their drunken university days as to keepsakes from paradise and fashioned a cult of their
"vanished" student years as poets or other romantics fashion their childhood. It was the same everywhere!
Everywhere they looked for "freedom" and "luck" in the past, out of sheer dread of their present
responsibilities and future course. They drank and caroused for a few years and then they slunk away to
become serious-minded gentlemen in the service of the state. Yes, our society was rotten, and these student
stupidities were not so stupid, not so bad as a hundred other things. By the time I reached my distant house
and was preparing for bed, all these thoughts had vanished and my entire being clung expectantly to the great
promise that this day had brought me. As soon as I wished, even tomorrow, I was to see Demian's mother. Let
the students have their drunken orgies and tattoo their faces; the rotten world could await its destruction--for
all I cared. I was waiting for one thing--to see my fate step forth in a new guise. I slept deeply until late in the
morning. The new day dawned for me like a solemn feast, the kind I had not experienced since childhood. I
was full of a great restlessness, yet without fear of any kind. I felt that an important day had begun for me and
I saw and experienced the changed world around me, expectant, meaningful, and solemn; even the gentle
autumn rain had its beauty and a calm and festive air full of happy, sacred music. For the first time the outer
world was perfectly attuned to the world within; it was a joy to be alive. No house, no shop window, no face
disturbed me, everything was as it should be, without any of the flat, humdrum look of the everyday;
everything was a part of Nature, expectant and ready to face its destiny with reverence. That was how the
world had appeared to me in the mornings when I was a small boy, on the great feast days, at Christmas or
Easter. I had forgotten that the world could still be so lovely. I had grown accustomed to living within myself.
I was resigned to the knowledge that I had lost all appreciation of the outside world, that the loss of its bright
colors was an inseparable part of the loss of my childhood, and that, in a certain sense, one had to pay for
freedom and maturity of the soul with the renunciation of this cherished aura. But now, overjoyed, I saw that
all this had only been buried or clouded over and that it was still possible--even if you had become liberated
and had renounced your childhood happiness--to see the world shine and to savor the delicious thrill of the
child's vision. The moment came when I found my way back to the garden at the edge of town where I had
taken leave of Demian the night before. Hidden behind tall, wet trees stood a little house, bright and livable.
Tall plants flowered behind plate glass; behind glistening windows dark walls shone with pictures and rows of
books. The front door led straight into a small, warm hallway. A silent old maid, dressed in black with a white
apron, showed me in and took my coat. She left me alone in the hallway. I looked around and at once was
swept into the middle of my dream. High up on the dark wood-paneled wall, above a door, hung a familiar
painting, my bird with the golden-yellow sparrow hawk's head, clambering out of the terrestrial shell. Deeply
moved, I stood there motionless--I felt joy and pain as though at this moment everything I had ever done and

experienced returned to me in the form of a reply and fulfillment. In a flash I saw hosts of images throng past
my mind's eye: my parents' house with the old coat of arms above the doorway, the boy Demian sketching the
emblem, myself as a boy under the fearful spell of my enemy Kromer, myself as an adolescent in my room at
school painting my dream bird at a quiet table, the soul caught in the intricacies of its own threads--and
everything, everything to this present moment resounded once more within me, was affirmed by me,
answered, sanctioned. With tears in my eyes I stared at my picture and read within myself. Then I lowered my
eyes: beneath the painting of the bird in the open door stood a tall woman in a dark dress. It was she. I was
unable to utter a word. With a face that resembled her son's, timeless, ageless, and full of inner strength, the
beautiful woman smiled with dignity. Her gaze was fulfillment, her greeting a homecoming. Silently I
stretched my hands out to her. She took both of them in her firm, warm hands. "You are Sinclair. I recognized
you at once. Welcome!" Her voice was deep and warm. I drank it up like sweet wine. And now I looked up
and into her quiet face, the black unfathomable eyes, at her fresh, ripe lips, the clear, regal brow that bore the
sign. "How glad I am, " I said and kissed her hands. "I believe I have been on my way my whole life --and
now I have come home. " She smiled like a mother. "One never reaches home, " she said. "But where paths
that have affinity for each other intersect the whole world looks like home, for a time. " She was expressing
what I had felt on my way to her. Her voice and her words resembled her son's and yet were quite different.
Everything was riper, warmer, more self-evident. But just as Max had never given anyone the impression of
being a boy, so his mother did not appear at all like a woman who had a full-grown son, so young and sweet
were her face and hair, so taut and smooth her golden skin, so fresh her mouth. More regal even than in my
dreams she stood before me. This, then, was the new guise in which my fate revealed itself to me, no longer
stern, no longer setting me apart, but fresh and joyful! I made no resolutions, took no vows--I had attained a
goal, a high point on the road: from there the next stage of the journey appeared unhampered and marvelous,
leading toward promised lands. Whatever might happen to me now, I was filled with ecstasy: that this woman
existed in the world, that I could drink in her voice and breathe her presence. No matter whether she would
become my mother, my beloved or a goddess--if she could just be here! if only my path would be close to
hers! She pointed up to my painting. "You never made Max happier than with this picture, " she said
thoughtfully. "And me, too. We were waiting for you and when the painting came we knew that you were on
your way. When you were a little boy, Sinclair, my son one day came home from school and said to me: there
is a boy in school, he has the sign on his brow, he has to become my friend. That was you. You have not had
an easy time but we had confidence in you. You met Max again during one of your vacations. You must have
been about sixteen at the time. Max told me about it --" I interrupted: "He told you about that? That was the
most miserable period of my life!" "Yes, Max said to me: Sinclair has the most difficult part coming now.
He's making one more attempt to take refuge among the others. He's even begun going to bars. But he won't
succeed. His sign is obscured but it sears him secretly. Wasn't it like that?" "Yes, exactly. Then I found
Beatrice and I finally found a master again. His name was Pistorius. Only then did it become clear to me why
my boyhood had been so closely bound up with Max and why I could not free myself from him. Dear mother,
at that time I often thought that I should have to take my life. Is the way as difficult as this for everybody?"
She stroked my hair. The touch felt as light as a breeze. "It is always difficult to be born. You know the chick
does not find it easy to break his way out of the shell. Think back and ask yourself: Was the way all that
difficult? Was it only difficult? Wasn't it beautiful, too? Can you think of a more beautiful and easier way?" I
shook my head. "It was difficult, " I said as though I were asleep, "it was hard until the dream came. " She
nodded and pierced me with a glance. "Yes, you must find your dream, then the way becomes easy. But there
is no dream that lasts forever, each dream is followed by another, and one should not cling to any particular
one. " I was startled and frightened. Was that a warning, a defensive gesture, so soon? But it didn't matter: I
was prepared to let her guide me and not to inquire into goals. "I do not know, " I said, "how long my dream
is supposed to last. I wish it could be forever. My fate has received me under the picture of the bird like a lover
and like a beloved. I belong to my fate and to no one else. " "As long as the dream is your fate you should
remain faithful to it, " she confirmed in a serious tone of voice. I was overcome by sadness and a longing to
die in this enchanted hour. I felt tears--what an infinity since I had last wept--well up irresistibly in my eyes
and overwhelm me. I turned abruptly away from her, stepped to the window, and stared blindly into the
distance. I heard her voice behind me, calm and yet brimful with tenderness as a beaker with wine. "Sinclair,
you are a child! Your fate loves you. One day it will be entirely yours--just as you dream it--if you remain
constant to it. " I had gained control of myself and turned toward her again. She gave me her hand. "I have a

few friends, " she said with a smile, "a few very close friends who call me Frau Eva. You shall be one of them
if you wish. " She led me to the door, opened it, and pointed into the garden. "You'll find Max out there. " I
stood dazed and shaken under the tall trees, not knowing whether I was more awake or more in a dream than
ever. The rain dripped gently from the branches. Slowly I walked out into the garden that extended some way
along the river. Finally I found Demian. He was standing in an open summer house, stripped to the waist,
punching a suspended sandbag. I stopped, astonished. Demian looked strikingly handsome with his broad
chest, and firm, manly features; the raised arms with taut muscles were strong and capable, the movements
sprang playfully and smoothly from hips, shoulders, and wrists. "Demian, " I called out. "What are you doing
there?" He laughed happily. "Practicing. I've promised the Japanese a boxing match, the little fellow is as
agile as a cat and, of course, just as sly, but he won't be able to beat me. There's a very slight humiliation for
which I have to pay him back. " He put on his shirt and coat. "You've seen my mother?" he asked. "Yes,
Demian, what a wonderful mother you have! Frau Eva! The name fits her perfectly. Sheis like a universal
mother. " For a moment he looked thoughtfully into my face. "So you know her name already? You can be
proud of yourself. You are the first person she has told it to during the first meeting. " From this day on I went
in and out of the house like a son or brother--but also as someone in love. As soon as I opened the gate, as
soon as I caught sight of the tall trees in the garden, I felt happy and rich. Outside was reality: streets and
houses, people and institutions, libraries and lecture halls--but here inside was love; here lived the legend and
the dream. And yet we lived in no way cut off from the outside world; in our thoughts and conversations we
often lived in the midst of it, only on an entirely different plane. We were not separated from the majority of
men by a boundary but simply by another mode of vision. Our task was to represent an island in the world, a
prototype perhaps, or at least a prospect of a different way of life. I, who had been isolated for so long, learned
about the companionship which is possible between people who have tasted complete loneliness. I never again
hankered after the tables of the fortunate and the feasts of the blessed. Never again did envy or nostalgia
overcome me when I witnessed the collective pleasures of others. And gradually I was initiated into the secret
of those who wear the sign in their faces. We who wore the sign might justly be considered "odd" by the
world; yes, even crazy, and dangerous. We wereaware or in the process of becoming aware and our striving
was directed toward achieving a more and more complete state of awareness while the striving of the others
was a quest aimed at binding their opinions, ideals, duties, their lives and fortunes more and more closely to
those of the herd. There, too, was striving, there, too, were power and greatness. But whereas we, who were
marked, believed that we represented the will of Nature to something new, to the individualism of the future,
the others sought to perpetuate the status quo. Humanity--which they loved as we did--was for them
something complete that must be maintained and protected. For us, humanity was a distant goal toward which
all men were moving, whose image no one knew, whose laws were nowhere written down. Apart from Frau
Eva, Max, and myself, various other seekers were more or less closely attached to the circle. Quite a few had
set out on very individual paths, had set themselves quite unusual goals, and clung to specific ideas and duties.
They included astrologers and cabalists, also a disciple of Count Tolstoi, and all kinds of delicate, shy, and
vulnerable creatures, followers of new sects, devotees of Indian asceticism, vegetarians, and so forth. We
actually had no mental bonds in common save the respect which each one accorded the ideals of the other.
Those with whom we felt a close kinship were concerned with mankind's past search for gods and ideals--their
studies often reminded me of Pistorius. They brought books with them, translated aloud texts in ancient
languages, showed us illustrations of ancient symbols and rites and taught us to see how humanity's entire
store of ideals so far consisted of dreams that had emanated from the unconscious, of dreams in which
humanity groped after its intimations of future potentialities. Thus we became acquainted with the wonderful
thousand-headed tangle of gods from prehistory to the dawn of the Christian conversion. We heard the creeds
of solitary holy men, of the transformations religions undergo in their migrations from one people to another.
Thus, from everything we collected in this manner, we gained a critical understanding of our time and of
contemporary Europe: with prodigious efforts mighty new weapons had been created for mankind but the end
was flagrant, deep desolation of the spirit. Europe had conquered the whole world only to lose her own soul.
Our circle also included believers, adherents of certain hopes and healing faiths. There were Buddhists who
sought to convert Europe, a disciple of Tolstoi who preached nonresistance to evil, as well as other sects. We
in the inner circle listened but accepted none of these teachings as anything but metaphors. We, who bore the
mark, felt no anxiety about the shape the future was to take. All of these faiths and teachings seemed to us
already dead and useless. The only duty and destiny we acknowledged was that each one of us should become

so completely himself, so utterly faithful to the active seed which Nature planted within him, that in living out
its growth he could be surprised by nothing unknown to come. Although we might not have been able to
express it, we all felt distinctly that a new birth amid the collapse of this present world was imminent, already
discernible. Demian often said to me: "What will come is beyond imagining. The soul of Europe is a beast that
has lain fettered for an infinitely long time. And when it's free, its first movements won't be the gentlest. But
the means are unimportant if only the real needs of the soul--which has for so long been repeatedly stunted and
anesthetized--come to light. Then our day will come, then we will be needed. Not as leaders and
lawgivers--we won't be there to see the new laws--but rather as those who are willing, as men who are ready to
go forth and stand prepared wherever fate may need them. Look, all men are prepared to accomplish the
incredibleif their ideals are threatened. But no one is ready when a new ideal, a new and perhaps dangerous
and ominous impulse, makes itself felt. The few who will be ready at that time and who will go forth--will be
us. That is why we are marked--as Cain was--to arouse fear and hatred and drive men out of a confining idyl
into more dangerous reaches. All men who have had an effect on the course of human history, all of them
without exception, were capable and effective only because they were ready to accept the inevitable. It is true
of Moses and Buddha, of Napoleon and Bismarck. What particular movement one serves and what pole one is
directed from are matters outside one's own choice. If Bismarck had understood the Social Democrats and
compromised with them he would have merely been shrewd but no man of destiny. The same applies to
Napoleon, Caesar, Loyola, all men of that species in fact. Always, you must think of these things in
evolutionary, in historical terms! When the upheavals of the earth's surface flung the creatures of the sea onto
the land and the land creatures into the sea, the specimens of the various orders that were ready to follow their
destiny were the ones that accomplished the new and unprecedented; by making new biological adjustments
they were able to save their species from destruction. We do not know whether these were the same specimens
that had previously distinguished themselves among their fellows as conservative, upholders of the status quo,
or rather as eccentrics, revolutionaries; but we do know they were ready, and could therefore lead their species
into new phases of evolution. That is why we want to beready. " Frau Eva was often present during these
conversations yet she did not participate in quite the same manner. She was a listener, full of trust and
understanding, an echo for each one of us who explained his thoughts. It seemed as though all thinking
emanated from her and in the end went back to her. My happiness consisted in sitting near her, hearing her
voice occasionally and sharing the rich, soulful atmosphere surrounding her. She was immediately aware of
any change, any unhappiness or new development within me. It even seemed to me that my dreams at night
were inspired by her. I would often recount them to her and she found them comprehensible and natural; there
was no unusual turn in them that she could not follow. For a time my dreams repeated patterns of our daytime
conversations. I dreamed that the whole world was in turmoil and that by myself, or with Demian, I was
tensely waiting for the great moment. The face of fate remained obscured but somehow bore the features of
Frau Eva: to be chosen or spurned by her, that was fate. Sometimes she would say with a smile: "Your dream
is incomplete, Sinclair. You've left out the best part. " And then I would remember the part I had left out and
not understand how I could have forgotten it. At times I was dissatisfied with myself and tortured with desire:
I believed I could no longer bear to have her near me without taking her in my arms. She sensed this, too, at
once. Once when I had stayed away for several days and returned bewildered she took me aside and said:
"You must not give way to desires which you don't believe in. I know what you desire. You should, however,
either be capable of renouncing these desires or feel wholly justified in having them. Once you are able to
make your request in such a way that you will be quite certain of its fulfillment, then the fulfillment will come.
But at present you alternate between desire and renunciation and are afraid all the time. All that must be
overcome. Let me tell you a story. " And she told me about a youth who had fallen in love with a planet. He
stood by the sea, stretched out his arms and prayed to the planet, dreamed of it, and directed all his thoughts to
it. But he knew, or felt he knew, that a star cannot be embraced by a human being. He considered it to be his
fate to love a heavenly body without any hope of fulfillment and out of this insight he constructed an entire
philosophy of renunciation and silent, faithful suffering that would improve and purify him. Yet all his dreams
reached the planet. Once he stood again on the high cliff at night by the sea and gazed at the planet and burned
with love for it. And at the height of his longing he leaped into the emptiness toward the planet, but at the
instant of leaping "it's impossible" flashed once more through his mind. There he lay on the shore, shattered.
He had not understood how to love. If at the instant of leaping he had had the strength of faith in the
fulfillment of his love he would have soared into the heights and been united with the star. "Love must not

entreat, " she added, "or demand. Love must have the strength to become certain within itself. Then it ceases
merely to be attracted and begins to attract. Sinclair, your love is attracted to me. Once it begins to attract me, I
will come. I will not make a gift of myself, I must be won. " Another time she told me a different story,
concerning a lover whose love was unrequited. He withdrew completely within himself, believing his love
would consume him. The world became lost to him, he no longer noticed blue sky and green woods, he no
longer heard the brook murmur; his ears had turned deaf to the notes of the harp: nothing mattered any more;
he had become poor and wretched. Yet his love increased and he would rather have died or been ruined than
renounce possessing this beautiful woman. Then he felt that his passion had consumed everything else within
him and become so strong, so magnetic that the beautiful woman must follow. She came to him and he stood
with outstretched arms ready to draw her to him. As she stood before him she was completely transformed and
with awe he felt and saw that he had won back all he had previously lost. She stood before him and
surrendered herself to him and sky, forest, and brook all came toward him in new and resplendent colors,
belonged to him, and spoke to him in his own language. And instead of merely winning a woman he embraced
the entire world and every star in heaven glowed within him and sparkled with joy in his soul. He had loved
and had found himself. But most people love to lose themselves. My love for Frau Eva seemed to fill my
whole life. But every day it manifested itself differently. Sometimes I felt certain that it was not she as a
person whom I was attracted to and yearned for with all my being, but that she existed only as a metaphor of
my inner self, a metaphor whose sole purpose was to lead me more deeply into myself. Things she said often
sounded like replies from my subconscious to questions that tormented me. There were other moments when I
sat beside her and burned with sensual desire and kissed objects she had touched. And little by little, sensual
and spiritual love, reality and symbol began to overlap. Then it would happen that as I thought about her in my
room at home in tranquil intimacy I felt her hand in mine and her lips touching my lips. Or I would be at her
house, would look into her face and hear her voice, yet not know whether she was real or a dream. I began to
sense how one can possess a love constantly and eternally. I would have an insight while reading a book--and
this would feel the same as Eva's kiss. She caressed my hair and smiled at me affectionately and this felt like
taking a step forward within myself. Everything significant and full of fate for me adopted her form. She could
transform herself into any of my thoughts and each of my thoughts could be transformed into her. I had been
apprehensive about the Christmas vacation--to be spent at my parents' house --because I thought it would be
agony to be away from Frau Eva for two whole weeks. But it did not turn out like that. It was wonderful to be
at home and yet be able to think of her. When I arrived back in H. I waited two more days before going to see
her, so as to savor this security, this being independent of her physical presence. I had dreams, too, in which
my union with her was consummated in new symbolic acts. She was an ocean into which I streamed. She was
a star and I another on my way to her, circling round each other. I told her this dream when I first visited her
again. 'The dream is beautiful, " she said quietly. "Make it come true. " There came a day in early spring that
I have never forgotten. I entered the hallway, a window was open and a stream of air let in the heavy fragrance
of the hyacinths. As no one was about, I went upstairs to Max Demian's study. I tapped lightly on the door
and, as was my custom, went in without waiting for a reply. The room was dark, all the curtains were drawn.
The door to the small adjoining room stood open. There Max had set up a chemical laboratory. That's where
the only light came from. I thought no one was in and drew back one of the curtains. Then I saw Max
slumped on a stool by the curtained window, looking oddly changed, and it flashed through me: You've seen
this before! His arms hung limp, hands in his lap, his head bent slightly forward, and his eyes, though open,
were unseeing and dead; in one of his pupils as in a piece of glass a thin, harsh ray of light snapped the lens
open and shut, open and shut. The wan face was absorbed in itself and without expression, except for its
immense rigidity; he resembled an age-old animal mask at the portal of a temple. He did not seem to breathe.
Overcome by dread I quietly left the room and walked downstairs. In the hallway I met Frau Eva, pale and
seemingly tired, which I had never known her to be before. Just then a shadow passed over the window, the
white glare of the sun suddenly fled. "I was in Max's room, " I whispered rapidly. "Has something happened?
He's either asleep or lost within himself, I don't know which; I saw him look like that once before. " "You
didn't wake him, did you?" she quickly asked. "No. He didn't hear me. I left the room immediately. Tell me,
what is the matter with him?" She swept the back of her hand once across her brow. "Don't worry, Sinclair,
nothing will happen to him. He has withdrawn. It will soon pass. " She stood up and went out into the
garden--although it was beginning to rain. I felt that she did not want me to accompany her and so I walked up
and down the hallway, inhaled the bewildering scent of the hyacinths, stared at my bird picture above the

doorway, and breathed the stifling atmosphere that filled the house that morning. What was it? What had
happened? Frau Eva returned before long. Raindrops clung to her black hair. She sat down in her armchair.
She seemed weary. I stepped up to her, bent over her head, and kissed the rain out of her hair. Her eyes were
bright and calm but the raindrops tasted like tears. "Should I go and see how he is?" I asked in a whisper. She
smiled weakly. "Don't be a little boy, Sinclair!" she admonished me, loudly as though trying to break a spell
within herself. "Get along now and come back later. I can't talk to you now. " I half walked, half ran from the
house and the town, toward the mountains. The fine rain slanted into my face, low clouds swept by as though
weighed down with fear. Near the ground there was hardly a breath of air but in the higher altitudes a storm
seemed to rage. Several times the lurid sun broke briefly through harsh rifts in the steel-gray clouds. Then a
loose, yellow cloud swept across the sky, collided with the other, gray bank of cloud. In a few seconds the
wind had fashioned a shape out of this yellow and blue-gray mass, a gigantic bird that tore itself free of the
steel-blue chaos and flew off into the sky with a great beating of wings. Then the storm became audible and
rain rattled down mixed with hail. A brief, incredible, terrifying roar of thunder cracked across the rain-lashed
landscape and immediately afterwards a gleam of sunshine burst through. On the nearby mountains the pale
snow shone livid and unreal above the brown forest. When, hours later, I returned wet and wind-blown,
Demian himself opened the door. He took me up to his room. A gas jet was burning in his laboratory and
papers were strewn about the floor. He had evidently been working. "Sit down, " he invited, "you must be
exhausted, it was horrible weather. One can see that you really were outside. There'll be tea in a moment. "
"Something is the matter today, " I began hesitantly. "It can't only be a thunderstorm. " He looked at me
inquiringly. "Did you see something?" "Yes. I saw a picture in the clouds, quite clearly for a moment. "
"What kind of picture?" "It was a bird. " "The sparrow hawk? Your dream bird?" "Yes, it was my sparrow
hawk. It was yellow and gigantic and it flew off into the blue-black clouds. " Demian heaved a great sigh.
There was a knock on the door. The old servant brought in the tea. "Help yourself, Sinclair, please. I don't
believe you saw the bird just by chance. " "By chance? Does one get to see such things by chance?" "Quite
right. No, one doesn't. The bird has a significance. Do you know what?" "No. I only feel that it signifies some
shattering event, a move on the part of destiny. I believe that it concerns all of us. " He was pacing excitedly
back and forth. "A move on the part of destiny!" he shouted. "I dreamed the same kind of thing last night and
my mother had a presentiment yesterday which conveyed the same message. I dreamed I was climbing up a
ladder placed against a tree trunk or tower. When I reached the top I saw the whole landscape ablaze --a vast
plain with innumerable towns and villages. I can't tell you the whole dream yet, everything is still somewhat
confused. " "Do you feel that the dream concerns you personally?" "Of course. No one dreams anything that
doesn't 'concern him personally. ' But it doesn't concern me only, you're right. I differentiate quite sharply
between dreams that reveal movements within my own soul and the other, far rarer dreams in which the fate of
all mankind suggests itself. I have rarely had such dreams and never before one of which I could say that it
was a prophecy which was fulfilled. The interpretations are too uncertain. But I know for sure that I have
dreamed something that doesn't concern me alone. For this dream links up with others, previous dreams I have
had, to which it is a sequel. These are the dreams, Sinclair, which fill me with the forebodings I've spoken of
to you. We both know that the world is quite rotten but that wouldn't be any reason to predict its imminent
collapse or something of the kind. But for several years I have had dreams from which I conclude, or which
make me feel, that the collapse of an old world is indeed Imminent. At first these were weak and remote
intimations but they have become increasingly stronger and more distinct. I still know nothing except
thatsomething is going to happen on a vast scale, something dreadful in which I myself will be involved.
Sinclair, we will take part in this event that we have discussed so often. The world wants to renew itself.
There's a smell of death in the air. Nothing can be born without first dying. But it is far more terrible than I
had thought. " I stared at him aghast. "Can't you tell me the rest of your dream?" I asked shyly. He shook his
head. "No. " The door opened to let in Frau Eva. "You're not feeling sad, I hope. " She looked refreshed, all
trace of fatigue had vanished. Demian smiled at her and she came up to us as a mother approaches frightened
children. "No, we are not sad, mother. We've merely tried to puzzle out these new omens. But it's no use
anyway. Whatever happens will suddenly be here; then we shall learn soon enough what we need to know. "
But I felt dispirited, and when I took my leave and walked alone through the hallway, the stale scent of the
hyacinths seemed cadaverous. A shadow had fallen over us.
8) The End Begins

I had persuaded my parents to allow me the summer semester in H. My friends and I now spent almost all our
time in the garden by the river instead of the house. The Japanese, who had been duly beaten in the boxing
match, had departed; the disciple of Tolstoi had gone, too. Demian kept a horse and went for long rides day
after day. I was frequently alone with his mother. There were times when I was simply astonished how
peaceful my life had become. I had so long been accustomed to being alone, to leading a life of self-denial, to
battling strenuously with my agonizing difficulties, that these months in H. Seemed to me altogether like a
magic dream island on which I was allowed to lead a comfortable, enchanted existence among beautiful and
agreeable surroundings. I had a presentiment that this was a foretaste of that new and higher community which
we speculated about so much. Yet at any moment this happiness could produce in me the deepest melancholy,
for I knew very well that it could not last. It was not my lot to breathe fullness and comfort, I needed the spur
of tormented haste. I felt that one day I would waken from these beloved images of beauty and stand, alone
again, in the cold world where there was nothing for me but solitude and struggle--neither peace nor
relaxation, no easy living together. At those moments I would nestle with redoubled affection close to Frau
Eva, glad that my fate still bore these beautiful calm features. The summer weeks passed quickly and
uneventfully, the semester was nearly over and it would soon be time for me to leave. I dared not think of it,
but clung to each beautiful day as the butterfly clings to his honeyed flower. This had been my happy time,
life's first fulfillment, my acceptance into this intimate, elect circle--what was to follow? I would battle
through again, suffer the old longings, dream dreams, be alone. One day foreboding came over me with such
force that my love for Frau Eva suddenly flared up painful within me. My God, how soon I must leave here,
see her no more, no longer hear her dear assured steps throughout the house, no longer find her flowers on my
table! And what had I achieved? I had dreamed, had luxuriated in dreams and contentment, instead of winning
her, instead of struggling to clasp her forever to myself! Everything she had told me about genuine love came
back to me, a hundred delicate admonitions, as many gentle enticements, promises perhaps--what had I made
of them? Nothing. Absolutely nothing! I went to the center of my room and stood still, endeavoring to
concentrate the whole of my consciousness on Frau Eva, summoning all the strength in my soul to let her feel
my love and draw her to me. She must come, she must long for my embrace, my kiss must tremble insatiably
on her ripe lips. I stood and concentrated every energy until I could feel cold creeping up my fingers and toes.
I felt strength radiating from me. For a few moments I felt something contract within me, something bright
and cool which felt like a crystal in my heart--I knew it was my ego. The chill crept up to my chest. Relaxed
from this terrible tension I felt that something was about to happen. I was mortally exhausted but I was ready
to behold Eva step into the room, radiant and ecstatic. The clattering of hooves could be heard approaching
along the street. It sounded near and metallic, . Then suddenly stopped. I leaped to the window and saw
Demian dismounting below. I ran down. "What is it, Demian?" He paid no attention to my words. He was
very pale and sweat poured down his cheeks. He tied the bridle of bis steaming horse to the garden fence and
took my arm and walked down the street with me. "Have you heard about it?" I had heard nothing. Demian
squeezed my arm and turned his face toward me, with a strangely somber yet sympathetic look in his eyes.
"Yes, it's starting. You've heard about the difficulties with Russia. " "What? Is it war?" He spoke very softly
although no one was anywhere near us. "It hasn't been declared yet. But there will be war. You can take my
word for that. I didn't want to worry you but I have seen omens on three different occasions since that time. So
it won't be the end of the world, no earthquake, no revolution, but war. You'll see what a sensation that will
be! People will love it. Even now they can hardly wait for the killing to begin--their lives are that dull! But
you will see, Sinclair, that this is only the beginning. Perhaps it will be a very big war, a war on a gigantic
scale. But that, too, will only be the beginning. The new world has begun and the new world will be terrible
for those clinging to the old. What will you do?" I was dumfounded, it all sounded so strange, so improbable.
"I don't know--and you?" He shrugged his shoulders. "I'll be called up as soon as the mobilization order
comes through. I'm a lieutenant. " "You, a lieutenant! I had no idea. " "Yes, that was one of the ways I
compromised. You know I dislike calling attention to myself so much I almost always went to the other
extreme, just to give a correct impression. I believe I'll be on the front in a week. " "My God. " "Now don't
get sentimental. Of course it's not going to be any fun ordering men to fire on living beings, but that will be
incidental. Each of us will be caught up in the great chain of events. You, too, you'll be drafted, for sure. "
"And what about your mother, Demian?" Only now my thoughts turned back to what had happened a quarter
of an hour before. How the world had changed in the meantime! I had summoned all my strength to conjure up

the sweetest of images and now fate looked at me suddenly with a threatening and horrible mask. "My
mother? We don't have to worry about her. She is safe, safer than anyone else in the world today. Do you love
her that much?" "Didn't you know?" He laughed lightly, relieved. "Of course I knew. No one has called my
mother Frau Eva who hasn't been in love with her. You either called me or her today. " "Yes, I called her. "
"She felt it. She sent me away all of a sudden, saying I would have to go see you. I had just told her the news
about Russia. " We turned around and exchanged a few words more. Demian untied his horse and mounted.
Only upstairs in my room did I realize how much Demian's news, and still more the previous strain, had
exhausted me. But Frau Eva had heard me! My thoughts had reached her heart. She would have come
herself--if... How curious all this was, and, fundamentally, how beautiful! And now there was to be war. What
we had talked about so often was to begin. Demian had known so much about it ahead of time. How strange
that the stream of the world was not to bypass us any more, that it now went straight through our hearts, and
that now or very soon the moment would come when the world would need us, when it would seek to
transform itself. Demian was right, one could not be sentimental about that. The only remarkable thing was
that I was to share the very personal matter of my fate with so many others, with the whole world in fact. Well,
so be it! I was prepared. When I walked through town in the evening every street corner was buzzing,
everywhere the word waswar. I went to Frau Eva's. We ate supper in the summer house. I was the only guest.
No one said a word about the war. Only later on, shortly before I was to leave, Frau Eva said: "Dear Sinclair,
you called me today. You know why I didn't come myself. But don't forget: you know the call now and
whenever you need someone who bears the sign, you can appeal to me. " She rose to her feet and preceded
me into the garden twilight. Tall and regal she strode between the silent trees. I am coming to the end of my
story. Everything went very rapidly from then on. Soon there was war, and Demian, strangely unfamiliar in
his uniform, left us. I accompanied his mother home. It was not long before I, too, took my leave of her. She
kissed me on the mouth and clasped me for a moment to her breast. Her great eyes burned close and firmly
into mine. All men seemed to have become brothers--overnight. They talked of "the fatherland" and of
"honor, " but what lay behind it was their own fate whose unveiled face they had now all beheld for one brief
moment. Young men left their barracks, were packed into trains, and on many faces I saw a sign --not
ours--but a beautiful, dignified sign nonetheless that meant love and death. I, too, was embraced by people
whom I had never seen before and I understood this gesture and responded to it. Intoxication made them do it,
not a hankering after their destiny. But this intoxication was sacred, for it was the result of their all having
thrown that brief and terribly disquieting glance into the eyes of their fate. It was nearly winter when I was
sent to the front. Despite the excitement of being under fire for the first time, in the beginning everything
disappointed me. At one time I had given much thought to why men were so very rarely capable of living for
an ideal. Now I saw that many, no, all men were capable of dying for one. Yet it could not be a personal, a
freely chosen ideal; it had to be one mutually accepted. As time went on though I realized I had
underestimated these men. However much mutual service and danger made a uniform mass of them, I still saw
many approach the will of fate with great dignity. Many, very many, not only during the attack but at every
moment of the day, wore in their eyes the remote, resolute, somewhat possessed look which knows nothing of
aims and signified complete surrender to the incredible. Whatever they might think or believe, they were
ready, they could be used, they were the clay of which the future could be shaped. The more single-mindedly
the world concentrated on war and heroism, on honor and other old ideals, the more remote and improbable
any whisper of genuine humanity sounded--that was all just surface, in the same way that the question of the
war's external and political objectives remained superficial. Deep down, underneath, something was taking
shape. Something akin to a new humanity. For I could see many men--and many died beside me--who had
begun to feel acutely that hatred and rage, slaughter and annihilation, were not bound up with these objectives.
No, these objectives and aims were completely fortuitous. The most primitive, even the wildest feelings were
not directed at the enemy; their bloody task was merely an irradiation of the soul, of the soul divided within
itself, which filled them with the lust to rage and kill, annihilate and die so that they might be born anew. One
night in early spring I stood guard in front of a farm that we had occupied. A listless wind was blowing
fitfully; across the Flemish sky cloud armies rode on high, somewhere behind them the suggestion of a moon.
I had been uneasy the entire day--something was worrying me deeply. Now on my dark guard post I fervently
recalled the images of my life and thought of Frau Eva and of Demian. I stood braced against a poplar tree
staring into the drifting clouds whose mysteriously writhing patches of light soon metamorphosed into huge
series of swirling images. From the strange weakness of my pulse, the insensitiveness of my skin to wind and

rain, and my intense state of consciousness I could sense that a master was near me. A huge city could be seen
in the clouds out of which millions of people streamed in a host over vast landscapes. Into their midst stepped
a mighty, godlike figure, as huge as a mountain range, with sparkling stars in her hair, bearing the features of
Frau Eva. The ranks of the people were swallowed up into her as into a giant cave and vanished from sight.
The goddess cowered on the ground, the mark luminous on her forehead. A dream seemed to hold sway over
her: she closed her eyes and her countenance became twisted with pain. Suddenly she cried out and from her
forehead sprang stars, many thousands of shining stars that leaped in marvelous arches and semicircles across
the black sky. One of these stars shot straight toward me with a clear ringing sound and it seemed to seek me
out. Then it burst asunder with a roar into a thousand sparks, tore me aloft and smashed me back to the ground
again, the world shattered above me with a thunderous roar. They found me near the poplar tree, covered with
earth and with many wounds. I lay in a cellar, guns roared above me. I lay in a wagon and jolted across the
empty fields. Mostly I was asleep or unconscious. But the more deeply I slept the more strongly I felt that
something was drawing me on, that I was following a force that had mastery over me. I lay in a stable, on
straw. It was dark and someone had stepped on my hand. But something inside me wanted to keep going and I
was drawn on more forcefully than ever, Again I lay in a wagon and later on a stretcher or ladder. More
strongly than ever I felt myself being summoned somewhere, felt nothing but this urge that I must finally get
there. Then I reached my goal. It was night and I was fully conscious. I had just felt the urge pulling mightily
within me: now I was in a long hall, bedded down on the floor. I felt I had reached the destination which had
summoned me. I turned my head: close to my mattress lay another; someone on it bent forward and looked at
me. He had the sign on his forehead. It was Max Demian. I was unable to speak and he could not or did not
want to either. He just looked at me. The light from a bulb strung on the wall above him played down on his
face. He smiled. He gazed into my eyes for what seemed an endless time. Slowly he brought his face closer to
mine: we almost touched. "Sinclair, " he said in a whisper. I told him with a glance that I heard. He smiled
again, almost as with pity. "Little fellow, " he said, smiling. His lips lay very close to mine. Quietly he
continued to speak. "Can you remember Franz Kromer?" he asked, I blinked at him and smiled, too. "Little
Sinclair, listen: I will have to go away. Perhaps you'll need me again sometime, against Kromer or something.
If you call me then I won't come crudely, on horseback or by train. You'll have to listen within yourself, then
you will notice that I am within you. Do you understand? And something else. Frau Eva said that if ever you
were in a bad way I was to give you a kiss from her that she sends by me... Close your eyes, Sinclair!" I
closed my eyes in obedience. I felt a light kiss on my lips where there was always a little fresh blood which
never would go away. And then I fell asleep. Next morning someone woke me: I had to have my wounds
dressed. When I was finally wide awake I turned quickly to the mattress next to mine. On it lay a stranger I'd
never seen before. Dressing the wound hurt. Everything that has happened to me since has hurt. But
sometimes when I find the key and climb deep into myself where the images of fate lie aslumber in the dark
mirror, I need only bend over that dark mirror to behold my own image, now completely resembling him, my
brother, my master.
The End.

Early Spring
Once, early in the nineties, our friend Knulp had to go to the
hospital for several weeks. It was mid-February when he was
discharged and the weather was abominable. After only a few
days on the road, he felt feverish again and was obliged to think
about getting a roof over his head. He had always had plenty of
friends, he would have met with a friendly reception in almost
every town in the region. But he was strangely proud about such
things and any friend from whom he accepted help could take it
as an honor.
This time he remembered Emil Rothfuss, the tanner in
Lдchstetten, and at nightfall, amid rain and west wind, he
knocked at the tanner's door. Rothfuss opened the shutters a crack
and shouted down into the dark street: "Who's there? Can't it wait
until daylight?"
Tired as he was, Knulp perked up at the sound of his friend's
voice. He remembered a little song he had made up years before
when he and Rothfuss had been traveling companions for a
month, and started to sing it:
A man walked into the hotel
After the day was done.
I know those tired features well,
It must be the Prodigal Son.
The tanner opened the shutters wide and leaned far out of
the window.
"Knulp! Is it you, or is it your ghost?"
"It's me!" cried Knulp. "But you can come down the stairs,
you don't have to jump out the window."

Happily the tanner ran down and opened the little front door.
Knulp had to blink when his friend held the smoking oil lamp up
to his face.
"And now, get inside!" Rothfuss cried out excitedly,
drawing his friend into the house. "You can tell me all about it
later. There's some supper left. And there's a bed for you too.
Good God, what weather to be out in! Have you got decent shoes
at least?"
Disregarding his questions and astonishment, Knulp stopped
on the stairs to unfold his turned-up trouser cuffs, then climbed
through the half light with assurance, though he had not set foot
in the house for four years.
In the hallway outside the door to the big room, he hesitated.
The tanner bade him go in, but Knulp took him by the hand and
held him back.
"Hold on," he whispered. "It seems you're married now."
"That's right."
"Well, you see. Your wife doesn't know me. Maybe she
won't be glad to see me. I wouldn't want to be in the way."
"Ho-ho! In the way!" Rothfuss laughed, opened the door
wide, and pushed Knulp into the brightly lit room. Over the
dining table a large oil lamp hung on three chains. A light cloud
of tobacco smoke hovered in mid-air; thin wisps of smoke floated
over to the hot lamp-chimney, where they whirled up swiftly and
vanished. On the table lay a newspaper and a pouch full of
tobacco. The tanner's young wife jumped up from the little sofa
on the far side of the room with embarrassed, not quite genuine
alacrity, as if she had been awakened from a nap and didn't want
to show it. For a moment Knulp blinked at her as though dazed by
the glare, then looked into her light-gray eyes and held out his
hand with a polite compliment.
"Well," said the tanner. "Here she is. And this is Knulp, my
friend Knulp that I've told you about. Naturally he'll stay with us,
we'll give him the journeyman's bed. Luckily it's empty. But first
we'll have a drink of cider together, and Knulp must have
something to eat. Wasn't there some liver sausage left?"

The tanner's wife rushed out of the room and Knulp looked
after her.
"She's kind of frightened," he said in an undertone. But
Rothfuss wouldn't agree.
"No children yet?" Knulp asked.
At that point she came back, bringing the sausage on a
pewter plate. She set it down beside the breadboard, on which she
had placed half a loaf of bread with the cut side down. A carved
inscription ran round the circular breadboard: Give us this day our
daily bread.
"Lis, do you know what Knulp just asked me?"
"Forget it," said Knulp. And with a smile he turned to the
lady of the house: "By your leave, ma'am."
But Rothfuss wouldn't forget it.
"If we had no children. That's what he asked me."
"Goodness!" she laughed, and left the room again.
"You haven't got any?" Knulp asked when she was gone.
"No, not yet. She's taking her time. It's better that way for
the first few years. But dig in, and I hope you like it."
The tanner's wife brought in the gray and blue earthenware
cider pitcher, set down three glasses, and filled them. Her
movements were deft. Knulp watched her and smiled.
"Your health, old friend!" cried the tanner, holding out his
glass. But Knulp was a gentleman. "Ladies first," he said. "Your
health, ma'am. Prosit, old man!"
They clinked glasses and drank. Beaming with pleasure,
Rothfuss winked at his wife and asked her if she had noticed what
fine manners his friend had.
She had noticed from the start.
"Herr Knulp is more polite than you," she said. "He knows
what's right and proper."
"Nonsense," said the guest. "We all do what we've learned.
When it comes to manners, you could easily put me to shame.
And how beautifully you set the table, like at the finest hotel!"
"Doesn't she!" said the tanner, and laughed. "But that too
was learned."

"Really? Where? Was your father a hotelkeeper?"
"No, he's been dead for years. I hardly knew him. But I
waited on table for several years at the Ox. Maybe you've heard
of it?"
"The Ox? Why, that used to be the best inn in Lдchstetten."
"It still is. Isn't it, Emil? Nearly all our guests were traveling
salesmen and tourists."
"I believe you, ma'am. I'm sure you had a pleasant life and
made good money. But a home of your own is even better."
After neatly removing the skin and setting it aside on his
plate, he slowly and with visible relish spread the soft sausage on
his bread. From time to time he took a swallow of the good
yellow cider. The tanner looked on with respectful appreciation,
as Knulp's slender, delicate hands went through the necessary
motions so neatly and easily, and the lady of the house also took
pleasure in watching him.
"I must say you don't look so good," the tanner remarked
critically, and Knulp had to admit that he had not been well of late
and had been in the hospital. But he passed over the unpleasant
parts of his story. His friend asked him what he meant to do next
and warmly offered to keep him as long as he liked. That was
exactly what Knulp had expected and counted on, but as though
smitten with bashfulness, he merely thanked him offhandedly and
postponed the discussion of such matters.
"We can talk about that tomorrow or the day after," he said
negligently. "Thank goodness the world isn't coming to an end.
Anyway, I'll stay here a little while."
He disliked making plans or promises too much ahead. He
felt uncomfortable unless the morrow was his to dispose of as he
pleased.
"If I should really stay here a while," he said after a time,
"you'll have to put me down as your journeyman."
"That's rich!" said the tanner with a laugh. "You my
journeyman! Anyway, you're not a tanner!"
"That doesn't matter. Don't you see? Tanning means nothing
to me. It's said to be a fine trade, but I have no talent for work.

But it would look good in my roadbook. I'd be eligible for sick
pay."
"Can I see your book?"
Knulp reached into the inside pocket of his almost new suit
and took out his roadbook, neatly enfolded in an oilcloth case.
The tanner looked at it and laughed. "Spotless! It looks as if
you'd left your mother only yesterday morning."
He studied the entries and official stamps and shook his
head with profound admiration. "What splendid order! With you,
everything has to be just right."
Keeping his roadbook in order was indeed one of Knulp's
hobbies. In its dazzling perfection, his roadbook was a delightful
fiction, a poem. Each of the officially accredited entries bore
witness to a glorious station in an honest, laborious life. The only
seemingly discordant feature was his restlessness, attested by
frequent changes of residence. The life certified by this official
passport was a product of Knulp's invention, and with infinite art
he spun out the fragile thread of this pseudo-career. In reality,
though he did little that was expressly prohibited, he carried on
the illegal and disdained existence of a tramp. Of course, he
would hardly have been so unmolested in his lovely fiction if the
police had not been well disposed toward him. They respected the
cheerful, entertaining young fellow for his superior intelligence
and occasional earnestness, and as far as possible left him alone.
He had seldom been arrested and never convicted of theft or
mendicancy, and he had highly respected friends everywhere.
Consequently, he was indulged by the authorities very much as a
nice-looking cat is indulged in a household, and left free to carry
on an untroubled, elegant, splendidly aristocratic and idle
existence.
"But that's enough now," he said, taking back his papers.
"You'd have been in bed long ago if I hadn't turned up." And,
with a compliment to the lady of the house, he arose.
"Come along, Rothfuss, and show me my bed." The tanner
lighted him up the narrow stairway to the journeyman's room on

the top floor. Against the wall stood an empty iron bedstead and a
wooden bed that was made up.
"Would you like a hot-water bottle?" asked the tanner in a
fatherly tone.
"Don't rub it in," said Knulp with a laugh. "Naturally a
master tanner like you wouldn't need one, now that he has such a
pretty little wife."
"Exactly," said Rothfuss with enthusiasm. "Here you are
getting into a cold attic bed, and sometimes there's no bed at all
and you have to sleep in the hay. When an honest craftsman like
me has a house and business and a nice wife. If you'd only wanted
to, you could have been a master craftsman long ago and be doing
better than me."
Meanwhile Knulp had hurriedly undressed and crawled
shivering between the cold sheets.
"Go on, go on," he said. "I'm comfortable and ready to
listen."
"I meant it seriously, Knulp."
"So did I, Rothfuss. But you mustn't get the idea that
marriage is your invention. Good night now."

Next day Knulp stayed in bed. He still felt rather weak, and
in any case he would hardly have gone out of doors in such
weather. In the morning when his friend dropped in, Knulp told
him not to worry about him, just to bring him a dish of soup at
lunchtime.
All day he lay quiet and content in the dim light of the attic
room. The cold and weariness of the road seeped away from him
and he basked in a feeling of sheltered warmth. He listened to the
regular thudding of the rain against the roof and to the fitful gusts
of the warm, soft wind. Now and then he dozed off for half an
hour and occasionally, as long as it was light enough, he leafed
through his traveling library -- a few sheets of paper on which he
had copied poems and sayings, a bundle of newspaper clippings,
and a few pictures that he had cut out of magazines. Among these

he had two favorites, which were creased and worn from frequent
handling. One was the actress Eleonora Duse, the other a sailboat
at sea in a high wind.
From boyhood Knulp had felt drawn to the sea and the north
country; several times he had made a start in that direction, and
once had gone as far as Brunswick. But time and time again a
strange anxiety and homesickness had driven this migrant, who
was always on the move and could never settle down anywhere,
back to South Germany by forced marches. His carefreeness
seemed to leave him when he found himself in a place with a
strange dialect and customs, where no one knew him and where it
was hard for him to keep his legendary roadbook in order.
At noon the tanner brought him soup and bread. He entered
the room quietly and spoke in a frightened whisper; he thought
Knulp must be sick, for he himself had never lain abed in broad
daylight since the days of his measles and chicken pox. Knulp,
who was feeling fine, didn't bother to explain, but merely said he
would be well and up the next day.
Late in the afternoon there was a knock at the door. Knulp
was dozing and made no answer. The tanner's wife tiptoed in,
removed the empty soup dish, and put a bowl of coffee in its
place on the stool beside the bed.
Knulp had heard her come in, but whether because he felt
lazy or merely out of caprice, he kept his eyes closed and gave no
sign of being awake. Standing there with the empty dish in her
hand, the young woman cast a glance at the sleeper, whose head
lay on his arm in its blue-checkered shirtsleeve. Struck by his fine
dark hair and the almost childlike beauty of his carefree face, she
stood a while, looking at the handsome young fellow about whom
her husband had told her such strange stories. She saw the bushy
eyebrows on his clear, delicately modeled forehead, his thin
brown cheeks, his fine red mouth and slender neck, and she liked
what she saw. She thought of the days when, as a waitress at the
Ox, a springtime fancy would come over her and she would let a
handsome young stranger like this one make love to her.

Thoughtful and slightly aroused, she leaned forward a little
to see his whole face. The tin spoon slid off the plate and fell to
the floor, and what with the stillness and embarrassing intimacy
of the place, she was scared to death.
Knulp opened his eyes slowly and unsuspectingly, as though
he had been sound asleep. He turned toward her, shaded his eyes
with his hand for a moment, and said with a smile: "Why, it's Frau
Rothfuss! And she's brought me coffee. A nice bowl of hot
coffee, the very thing I was dreaming about. Thank you, Frau
Rothfuss. By the way, what time is it?"
"Four," she said quickly. "Now drink it while it's hot. I'll
come back later for the bowl."
And out she ran as though she hadn't a moment to spare.
Knulp looked after her and listened as she hastily descended the
stairs. His eyes were thoughtful and he shook his head several
times, then he let out a soft birdlike whistle and turned to his
coffee.
But an hour before dark he began to feel bored. His health
was restored, he was wonderfully rested, and he wanted company.
Contentedly he got out of bed and dressed, crept down the dark
stairs as quietly as a cat, and slipped out of the house unnoticed.
A damp wind was still blowing from the southwest, but the rain
had stopped and there were clear spaces between the clouds.
Sniffing at the air, Knulp sauntered down the darkened
street and across the deserted marketplace. Then he stood in the
open doorway of a blacksmith's shop, watched the apprentices
cleaning up, and, while warming his hands over the dying forge
fire, struck up a conversation with the journeymen. He inquired
about various acquaintances in the town, about deaths and
marriages. The master took him for a fellow blacksmith, for
Knulp knew the language of every trade and the signs by which
its practitioners recognize one another.
Meanwhile Frau Rothfuss was making her evening soup,
fiddling with the iron rings of the little stove, and peeling
potatoes. When she had finished and the soup was safely
simmering on a low fire, she took the kitchen lamp, went into the

big room, and stood before the mirror. In it she found what she
had been looking for: a full face with fresh cheeks and bluish-gray
eyes. Her hair didn't seem quite right, and with a touch or two of
her nimble fingers she put it in order. Then she gave her hands,
which she had washed only a moment before, another wipe on her
apron, picked up the lamp, and went quickly up to the attic.
She knocked at the door of the journeyman's room, first
softly, then a little louder. When there was no answer, she set the
lamp down on the floor and opened the door with both hands,
very cautiously for fear it would creak. Then she entered on her
tiptoes, took one step, and ran her hands over the stool by the
bedside.
"Are you asleep?" she asked in a soft voice. And then again:
"Are you asleep? I've come to clear away the coffee things."
When there was no sound, not so much as a breath, she
stretched out her hand toward the bed, but quickly withdrew it
with an eerie feeling, and went out for the lamp. Finding the room
empty, the bed carefully made, and even the pillows and
featherbed shaken out, she rushed back down to the kitchen in
confusion, torn between fright and disappointment.
Half an hour later, when the tanner had come in to supper
and she had already set the table, she began to worry. But she was
afraid to tell her husband about her visit to the attic room. Just
then the outer gate opened, soft steps passed over the paved
corridor and up the winding stairs, and there stood Knulp. He
took off his trim brown felt hat and wished them good evening.
"Great guns!" the tanner cried out in consternation. "Where
have you been? He's sick and off he goes, running around in the
night! You'll catch your death."
"Right you are," said Knulp. "I see I'm just on time, Frau
Rothfuss. I smelled your fine soup way over at the marketplace.
That will keep my death away from me."
They sat down to eat. The master of the house was feeling
talkative, he sang the praises of his home life and the advantages
of being a master craftsman. He teased his guest and then lectured
him in earnest; it was high time that he stopped gadding about

doing nothing. Knulp listened but said little in reply, and the
tanner's wife didn't open her mouth. She was annoyed with her
husband, who struck her as uncouth compared to the handsome
and well-mannered Knulp, and she showed her good opinion of
the guest by the attentiveness with which she waited on him. At
the stroke of ten, Knulp said good night and asked the tanner to
lend him his razor.
"Did you ever see anybody so clean!" Rothfuss exclaimed.
"The second his chin starts to tickle, his beard has to come off.
Well, good night. I hope you feel better!"
Before going to his room, Knulp leaned out of the little
window at the head of the stairs to take a look at the weather and
see what was going on in the neighborhood. The wind had died
down and between the roofs there was a black patch of sky
studded with clear, damply shimmering stars.
He was about to pull in his head and close the window when
suddenly the little window across from him, in the house next
door, lighted up. He saw a small, low room very much like his
own; a young servant girl had come in, holding a brass
candlestick in one hand and in the other a large water pitcher,
which she set down on the floor. Then she held the candle over
her narrow bed. Covered with a coarse red blanket, it was plain
but neat, and invited sleep. She put the candlestick down, he
could not see where, and seated herself on a low green-painted
wooden box, the typical servant girl's trunk.
The moment this unexpected scene began to unfold, Knulp
had blown out his own candle, so as to avoid being seen, and now
he stood quietly peering out of his window.
The girl across the way was the kind that appealed to him.
She may have been eighteen or nineteen, not very tall, with an
attractive olive complexion, brown eyes, and thick brown hair.
Her pleasant, quiet face did not look exactly happy; all in all, she
seemed rather woebegone as she sat there on her hard green box,
and Knulp, who knew the world and young girls as well, had a
pretty fair idea that the poor thing hadn't left her native village
very long ago with her box, and was homesick. Holding her thin,

dark-skinned hands in her lap, she sought brief comfort in sitting
for a little while on her meager possessions and thinking of home.
As motionless in his window as she was in her room, Knulp
peered with strange eagerness into this unknown human life, so
innocently nursing its sweet sorrow in the candlelight without a
thought that someone might be watching. He saw her kindly
brown eyes, now unconcealed, now covered by long lashes, he
saw the red light playing softly over her dark, childlike cheeks,
and as he watched her slender young hands on the dark-blue
cotton of her lap, he knew they were tired and resting awhile
before getting down to undressing -- the day's last chore.
At last the girl raised her head with its heavy pinned-up
braids, heaved a sigh, looked dreamily but no less sorrowfully out
into the void, and then bent down to untie her shoelaces.
Knulp was reluctant to leave his post, but it struck him as
wrong and almost cruel to watch the poor child undressing. He
would have liked to call out to her and chat with her a while, to
make some joke that would send her to bed a little happier. But he
was afraid she would take fright and blow out her candle if he
called to her.
Instead, he resorted to one of his many arts. He began to
whistle. The sound was so faint that it seemed to come from the
distance. He whistled the folk song "In a cool green valley, a mill
wheel turns all day," and he managed to make his whistling so
frail and delicate that the girl listened for some time without
knowing quite what it was. It was only at the third stanza that she
slowly stood up and went to the window.
She leaned out and listened, while Knulp went on whistling.
For a few measures she wagged her head in time with the tune.
Then suddenly she looked up and saw where it came from.
"Is there somebody over there?" she asked in a whisper.
"Only a tanner's apprentice," he answered just as softly. "I
didn't mean to prevent you from sleeping. I was a little homesick,
so I thought I'd whistle a tune. But I also know some cheerful
ones. -- Are you a stranger here too?"
"I'm from the Black Forest."

"Ah, from the Black Forest. So am I. How do you like it
here in Lдchstetten? I don't like it at all."
"Oh, I don't know yet, I've only been here a week. But I
don't really like it much. Have you been here long?"
"No, only three days. What village are you from?"
"You wouldn't know it."
"You never can tell. Or is it a secret?"
"Achthausen. It's only a hamlet."
"But a pretty one. The first thing you see is a chapel. Then
there's a mill, a sawmill I think it is, and they've got a big yellow
St. Bernard. Am I right or wrong?"
"My goodness, that's Bello!"
When she saw that he knew her village and had actually
been there, the greater part of her suspicion left her; she perked up
and asked eagerly: "Do you know Andres Flick?"
"No, I don't know anybody there. That's your father, isn't
it?"
"Yes."
"Then you must be Frдulein Flick, and when I find out your
first name I'll be able to write you a postcard the next time I pass
through Achthausen."
"Do you want to leave here so soon?"
"No, I don't want to. But I want to know your name,
Frдulein Flick."
"But I don't know yours either."
"I'm sorry about that, but it's easily mended. My name is
Karl Eberhard. Now if we meet in the daytime you know what to
call me, but what am I to call you?"
"Barbara."
"Thanks. That's fine. But it's a hard name to pronounce and
I'm almost willing to bet they called you Bдrbele at home."
"Yes, they did. But if you know everything, why do you ask
so many questions? And now it's time to go to sleep. Good night,
tanner."

"Good night, Frдulein Bдrbele. Sleep well, and just because
it's you, I'll whistle another tune. Don't run away, there's no
charge."
He started right in and whistled a flamboyant yodel-like tune
full of trills and turns, which leapt and sparkled like dance music.
Amazed at his skill, she listened to the end. When he had done,
she slowly drew the shutters tight and fastened them, while Knulp
found his way to his room in the dark.
Next morning Knulp got up early and made use of the
tanner's razor. But the tanner had worn a full beard for years and
the razor was so neglected that Knulp had to hone it on his
suspenders for half an hour before it would cut. When he had
finished, he put on his coat, picked up his shoes, and went down
to the kitchen, where it was warm and already smelled of coffee.
He asked the tanner's wife for a brush and polish for his
shoes.
"Go 'long!" she cried. "That's not the kind of work for a
man. Let me do it."
But that he would not allow, and when finally with an
awkward laugh she set down the brush and polish before him, he
did the work thoroughly, neatly, and with playful ease, like a man
who did manual labor only very occasionally, when in the mood,
but then cheerfully and with great care.
"Beautiful!" said the tanner's wife admiringly, and looked at
him. "As shiny as if you were going to see your sweetheart."
"Oh, I wish I were."
"I believe you. I'll bet you've got a pretty one." She laughed
again insinuatingly. "Maybe more than one?"
"Oh, that wouldn't be nice," said Knulp reproachfully. "I can
show you a picture of her."
She stepped eagerly closer as he drew his oilcloth portfolio
from his pocket and took out the picture of Duse. She studied it
with interest.
"She's high-class," she began cautiously. "Almost like a real
lady. But kind of skinny. Is her health all right?"

"Oh yes, as far as I know. But now I'll go say hello to the
old man. I can hear him in the big room."
He went into the room and bade the tanner good morning.
The room had been swept and looked friendly and homelike with
its light-colored paneling, its clock, its mirror, and the
photographs on the wall. A cozy room like this, thought Knulp,
isn't bad in the winter, but it's not really worth marrying for. The
favor shown him by the tanner's wife gave him no pleasure at all.
When they had had their coffee he went out in back with
Rothfuss, who showed him through the tannery. Knulp knew
almost every trade and amazed his friend by his knowledgeable
questions.
"How do you know all that?" he asked with animation.
"Anyone would think you were a journeyman tanner, or at least
that you'd been one."
"A traveling man learns all sorts of things," said Knulp
modestly. "Come to think of it, I learned about tanning from you.
Don't you remember? Six or seven years ago, when we were on
the road together. I made you tell me all about it."
"And you still remember all that?"
"Some of it, Rothfuss. But I won't take up any more of your
time. Too bad, I'd have liked to give you a hand, but it's so damp
and stuffy down there, and I've still got this cough. Goodbye for
now, old man, I'll take a little turn in town while the rain holds
off."
And neatly brushed, his brown felt hat tilted back just a
little, he sauntered off with a light, jaunty step, carefully skirting
the puddles. Rothfuss stood in the doorway looking after him.
"Lucky man," the tanner reflected with a twinge of envy.
And on his way to the tanning pits Rothfuss thought about his
eccentric friend who wanted nothing of life but to look on, and
the tanner could not have said whether this was asking too much
or too little. A man who worked hard and got ahead was better off
in many ways, but he could never have such delicate, graceful
hands or walk with so light and jaunty a step. No, Knulp was right
in doing what his nature demanded and what few others could do,

in speaking to strangers like a child and winning their hearts, in
saying pleasant things to ladies of all ages, and making Sundays
out of weekdays. You could only take him as he was, and when
he needed a roof over his head, it was a pleasure and an honor to
give him one; indeed, you almost wanted to thank him, for he
brought lightness and gaiety into the house.
Meanwhile his guest, happy and alert with curiosity, strolled
through the town, whistling a military march through his teeth,
and, taking his time about it, sought out the places and people he
knew from former days. First he climbed a steep hill to an
outlying slum where he knew an unfortunate tailor, Schlotterbeck
by name, who was forever mending old trousers and was seldom
given a new suit to make. A great pity, for he was skilled at his
trade, he had started out with high hopes and worked in good
shops. But he had married young, he already had several children,
and his wife had little talent for housekeeping.
Knulp found the tailor on the third floor of a house set back
from the street. His little workshop hung like a bird's nest over the
void, for the house was built on the hillside, and when you looked
down from the windows, you not only had the three stories below
you but further on a steep slope covered with pathetic slanting
gardens and patches of grass and ending in a gray confusion of
chicken coops, rabbit hutches, and woodsheds; the nearest roofs
that could be seen lay far below, at the bottom of the valley.
However, the workshop was light and airy, and as he sat crosslegged on his big table by the window the tailor could look out
over the world like a lighthouse keeper.
"Morning, Schlotterbeck," said Knulp, stepping into the
room. Blinded by the bright light, the tailor narrowed his eyes and
peered in the direction of the door.
"Ah, Knulp!" he cried joyfully and held out his hand. "Back
in town? And what's wrong, to bring you all the way up here?"
Knulp pulled up a three-legged stool and sat down. "Give
me a needle and a bit of your very best brown wool, I want to
check my equipment."

He removed his coat and vest, selected his yarn, threaded a
needle, and with vigilant eyes inspected his whole suit, which still
looked as good as new. Whenever he discovered a thin spot, a
loose trimming, or a button that was not quite tight, he set it to
rights with nimble fingers.
"And how are you otherwise?" Schlotterbeck asked. "The
weather hasn't been so good. But then if a man has his health and
no family. . ."
Knulp cleared his throat argumentatively.
"Yes, of course," he said wearily. "The Lord sends down His
rain on righteous and unrighteous alike, and only the tailors keep
dry. But you're never satisfied, are you, Schlotterbeck?"
"Oh, Knulp. I'm not complaining. But listen to the children
screaming in there. There are five of them now. Here I sit,
working my fingers to the bone till late at night, and it's never
enough. And all you do is gad about."
"Wrong, my friend. I was in the hospital for four or five
weeks in Neustadt, and they don't keep a man a minute longer
than he absolutely needs, and nobody'd stay any longer anyway.
The ways of the Lord are strange, friend Schlotterbeck."
"Keep your pious sayings to yourself."
"Lost your religion, eh? I've just been trying to get religion
and that's why I came to see you. I want you to tell me all about
it."
"Don't bother me with religion! In the hospital, you say? I'm
sorry to hear that."
"Never mind, it's over now. I want you to tell me about
Ecclesiasticus and Revelation. You see, I had plenty of time in the
hospital, and they had a Bible. I read nearly all of it, so now I can
put in a word too. A curious book, the Bible."
"You've got something there. It's curious, all right. Half of it
must be lies, because nothing fits together. Maybe you understand
it better, because you went to Latin school."
"I don't remember much of that."

"You see, Knulp. . ." The tailor spat through the open
window and stared. There was bitterness in his face. "Religion is
no good. It's no good and I'm through with it. Through with it."
The vagrant looked at him thoughtfully. "Really? Aren't you
going too far, old friend? It seems to me there are some very good
things in the Bible."
"Sure. And when you read a little further you always find
the opposite. No, I'm fed up with it. Fed up."
Knulp had risen and picked up an iron.
"You could put a few chunks of coal on the fire," he
suggested.
"What for?"
"I'd like to iron my vest a little, and it won't do my hat any
harm either, after all that rain."
"Still the same old dandy!" cried Schlotterbeck with a note
of irritation. "What's the good of dressing like a duke when you're
half starved?"
Knulp smiled serenely. "It looks better and it gives me
pleasure, and if you don't want to do it out of piety, just do it to be
nice and to please an old friend."
The tailor left the room and soon came back with a hot iron.
"That's fine," said Knulp. "Thank you."
Cautiously he began to smooth the brim of his hat. But he
was not as skillful at ironing as he was at sewing; his friend took
the iron out of his hand and did it himself.
"That's very kind of you," said Knulp. "Now it's a Sunday
hat again. But look here, tailor, you ask too much of the Bible.
The way I see it, everybody's got to figure out for himself what's
true and what life is like; those are things that you can't learn from
any book. The Bible is old; in those days people didn't know a
good many things that we know today; but for that very reason
there are a lot of fine things in it, and true things too. Parts of it, I
thought, were like a beautiful picture book. The way that girl -Ruth -- goes through the fields gleaning, that's beautiful, you can
smell the warm summer in it, or the way the Saviour sits down
with the little children and thinks: You mean a lot more to me

than all those grownups with their pride! If you ask me, he was
right, and we can learn from him."
"Yes," Schlotterbeck admitted, "that's a fact. But it's easier
to do that with other people's children than to have five of your
own and not know how you're going to feed them."
He relapsed into bitter gloom and Knulp couldn't bear to see
him that way. He resolved that before leaving he would say
something to cheer him up. He thought a little while, then he
leaned toward the tailor, looked earnestly into his face with his
bright eyes, and said softly: "But don't you love your children?"
The tailor stared at Knulp in horror. "Of course I do! How
can you say such a thing? Of course I love them, especially the
oldest."
Knulp nodded earnestly.
"I'm going now, Schlotterbeck, and many thanks. My vest is
worth twice as much now. -- But you've got to be kindly and
cheerful with your children, that's food and drink to them. And
now listen, I'm going to tell you something that nobody knows
and that you needn't repeat."
Mollified, the tailor looked attentively into Knulp's clear
blue eyes, which had grown grave. Knulp spoke so softly that the
tailor had difficulty in understanding him.
"Look at me! You envy me. You think: he has no family and
no worries. But you're all wrong. I have a child, a little fellow two
years old. He was taken in by strangers because his father was
unknown and his mother died in childbed. There's no need for you
to know what city he's in, but I know, and when I go there I creep
up to the house. I stand by the fence and wait, and when I'm in
luck I see the little fellow. But I can't hold out my hand to him or
give him a kiss; the most I can ever do is whistle a tune for him as
I go by. -- Well, that's how it is, goodbye now, and be glad you
have children."

Knulp continued on his way through the town. He stood for
a while chatting at the window of a turner's shop and watched the

swift play of the curly wood shavings. Farther on he stopped to
say hello to the constable, who was devoted to him and held out
his birchwood snuffbox. Wherever he went, old friends related the
lesser and greater incidents of family and workshop, he heard of
the untimely death of the municipal accountant's wife and of how
the mayor's son had been misbehaving, and in return he reported
on events in other towns, taking pleasure in the tenuous, goodhumored ties which he, as friend, acquaintance, and sharer of
secrets, had formed here and there with the more settled members
of the population. It was Saturday. He stopped in the gateway of a
brewery to ask the journeymen coopers where there would be
dancing that evening and the next day.
There were several places, but the best was the Lion at
Gertelfingen, only half an hour away. That, he decided, was
where he would take Bдrbele, the girl next door.
It was nearly lunchtime, and as Knulp climbed the stairs of
the Rothfuss house a pleasantly pungent smell came his way. He
stopped still and breathed in the balm with boyish pleasure and
curiosity. Despite the lightness of his step, the tanner's wife had
heard him. She flung open the kitchen door and stood in the
bright opening, clouded in the steam of her cooking.
"Ah, Herr Knulp," she cried out affectionately. "I'm glad
you're so early. You see, we're having liver dumplings, and I
thought maybe I could fry up a slice of liver just for you, if you
like. How do you feel about it?"
Knulp stroked his cheek and made a courtly gesture.
"Why should there be something special for me? I'll be only
too happy with a dish of soup."
"That's no way to talk. When a man's been sick, he needs
proper nourishment, he's got to get his strength back. But maybe
you don't care for liver. Some people don't."
He laughed modestly. "Oh, I'm not one of those. A dish of
liver dumplings is a Sunday dinner. If I could have them every
Sunday of my life, I'd be perfectly happy."

"While you're staying with us you must have everything you
want. What did I learn to cook for? Just speak up. There's an extra
slice of liver, I've saved it for you. It would do you good."
She came closer and gave him an encouraging smile. He
understood quite well what she meant, and she was rather pretty,
but he pretended not to notice. He played with his fine hat that the
poor tailor had ironed, and looked to one side.
"Thank you, Frau Rothfuss. Thank you for your kindness.
But I really prefer dumplings. You've been spoiling me enough as
it is."
She smiled and threatened him with her forefinger. "You
don't have to act so bashful. It doesn't convince me anyway.
Dumplings then. With plenty of onions, eh?"
"I can't say no to that."
She went busily back to her stove, while he went into the big
room, where the table had already been laid. He sat reading
yesterday's paper until the tanner came in and the soup was
served. When the meal was over, the three of them played cards
for a little while, and Knulp amazed his hostess with a few
hazardous and graceful new card tricks. He had a playfully
negligent way of shuffling and then gathering up the deck with
the speed of lightning; he tossed his card on the table with an
elegant gesture and occasionally ran his thumb over the edge of
his cards. The tanner watched him with the admiration and
indulgence that unprofitable skills arouse in a hardworking
citizen. But his wife observed these signs of savoir-vivre with
knowing interest. Her eyes rested attentively on his long graceful
hands, which no hard work had ever disfigured.
Through the small windowpanes a thin, uncertain beam of
sunlight poured into the room, passed over the table and the cards,
played fitfully with the faint shadows on the floor and circled
tremulously round the pale-blue ceiling. Knulp's eyes sparkled as
he took it all in: the play of the February sun, the peace and quiet
of the house, his friend's grave, work-hardened face, and the
pretty woman's veiled glances. He didn't like it, this wasn't his
aim in life, this wasn't his kind of happiness. If my health were

better and if it were summer, he thought, I wouldn't stay here an
hour longer.
"I think I'll follow the sun for a while," he said, as Rothfuss
picked up the cards and looked at the clock. He went downstairs
with the tanner, left him in the drying shed with his skins,
and.wandered off through the dismal grass plot which extended,
interspersed with tanning pits, down to the river. There the tanner
had built a little board pier to stand on when washing his skins.
Knulp sat down on the pier, letting his feet dangle over the swift
silent stream, and watched with delight the dark fishes darting
here and there below him. Then he studied his surroundings,
trying to figure out a way of speaking to the little servant girl next
door.
The gardens of the two houses adjoined, separated only by a
broken-down lath fence. Down by the water the fence poles had
long since rotted away and one could pass without difficulty from
one garden to the other. The neighbor's garden seemed better-kept
than the tanner's tangled grass plot. Knulp could see four little
vegetable patches, overgrown with weeds as they are in the
wintertime, two meager borders of lettuce and winter spinach, and
a number of bowed rose bushes, their crowns buried in the
ground. Farther up there were several handsome fir trees, which
hid the house.
After a careful study of the neighbor's garden, Knulp crept
silently as far as the fir trees; between them he could see the
house, with the kitchen in back. He had not long to wait before he
saw the girl, her sleeves rolled up, at work in the kitchen. The
lady of the house was with her, giving orders, showing her one
thing and another, as women must do when, unwilling to pay an
experienced maid, they take on a beginner every year and then are
always full of praises for the girl who has just left. But the tone in
which she instructed and found fault was without malice;
apparently the new girl was already used to it, for she went about
her work calmly and with unruffled brow.
The intruder stood leaning against a tree, watching and
listening with the vigilance of a hunter and the serene patience of

a man whose time is cheap and who has learned to enjoy life as a
spectator. It gave him pleasure to watch the young girl whenever
she appeared in the window. The rest of the time he listened and
gathered from her employer's speech that she was not a native of
Lдchstetten but of some place farther up in the valley. Chewing
on a fragrant fir twig, he listened patiently for half an hour and
then another half hour until at length the lady of the house
disappeared and all was silent in the kitchen.
He waited a little longer, then approached quietly and
tapped on the kitchen window with a dry branch. The girl paid no
attention and he had to knock again. This time she came to the
half-open window, opened it wide, and looked out.
"Goodness, what are you doing here?" she exclaimed in a
whisper. "I almost had a fright."
"How could I frighten anybody?" said Knulp with a smile. "I
just wanted to say hello and see how you were getting along. And
besides, it's Saturday; I wanted to ask if you could take a little
walk with me tomorrow afternoon."
She shook her head; the look on her face was so woebegone
that he felt really sorry for her.
"No," she said in a friendly tone. "I won't be off tomorrow;
only in the morning to go to church."
"Hm," Knulp muttered. "But then you could go out with me
this evening."
"This evening? Well yes, I'll be free, but I mean to write a
letter -- to my people at home."
"Oh, you'll write your letter an hour later, it won't go out
tonight anyway. I'd been so looking forward to a little chat with
you, and we could have such a nice walk this evening, if it doesn't
rain pitchforks. So be nice. You're not afraid of me, are you?"
"I'm not afraid of anybody and certainly not of you. But I
can't. If they see me out walking with a man. . ."
"But Bдrbele, nobody knows you here. Besides, it's no sin
and it's nobody's business. You're not a schoolgirl any more. So
don't forget, I'll be waiting at eight o'clock down by the

gymnasium -- you know, next to the cattle market. Or should I
come earlier? I can if you like."
"No, not earlier. No. . . don't come at all, it's impossible, I
can't. . ."
He displayed his boyish, crestfallen look.
"Well, if you don't feel like it!" he said sadly. "It seemed to
me you were all alone and a stranger here and you must be
homesick sometimes, and me too, and we could have talked a
little. I'd have liked to hear more about Achthausen, because of
being there once. But I can't force you, and don't take it amiss."
"Why would I take it amiss? It's just that I can't."
"You're free this evening, Bдrbele. You just don't want to
come. But maybe you'll change your mind. I've got to go now, but
I'll be outside the gymnasium this evening, and if nobody comes
I'll go for a walk by myself and think of you writing your letter to
Achthausen. So goodbye and no hard feelings."
He gave a quick nod and was gone before she could say
anything more. She saw him vanish behind the trees and a look of
perplexity came over her face. Then she went back to her work
and suddenly she began -- the lady of the house had gone out -- to
sing for all she was worth.
Knulp heard her. He was sitting on the tanner's pier again,
rolling little balls from a piece of bread he had put in his pocket at
lunch. He dropped the bread balls gently into the water one after
another, and watched musingly as they drifted a little way with
the current and sank to the dark bottom, where they were snapped
up by the silent ghostlike fishes.

"Well," said the tanner at supper, "here it is Saturday. You
wouldn't know how good it feels after a hard week."
"Oh, I can imagine," said Knulp with a smile. Frau Rothfuss
smiled, too, and gave him a mischievous look.
"Tonight," Rothfuss went on in a festive tone, "tonight we'll
have a nice jug of beer together, the old lady will go and get it

right away. And tomorrow, if the weather's good, the three of us
will go for a hike. What do you say to that, old friend?"
Knulp gave him a good thump on the shoulder.
"It's a good life here with you, I've got to say that. I'm
looking forward to our hike. But this evening I'll be busy; I have a
friend here; he's been working in the upper blacksmith shop and
he's leaving in the morning. -- I'm sorry, but we'll have all day
tomorrow together, or I wouldn't have arranged it that way."
"But you can't go running around at night when you're still
half sick."
"Oh, it's no good coddling myself too much. I won't be out
late. Where do you keep the key, so I can let myself in?"
"What a stubborn fellow you are! All right, go if you must.
You'll find the key behind the shutters of the basement window.
You know the place?"
"Of course. Well, I'll be going now. Don't stay up for me.
Good night. Good night, Frau Rothfuss."
He went down the stairs and had reached the outer door
when the tanner's wife came running after him. She handed him
an umbrella and, like it or not, Knulp had to take it.
"You must take care of yourself, Knulp," she said. "And
now I'll show you where to find the key."
She took him by the hand in the darkness, led him around in
back, and stopped by a little window.
"We put the key behind the shutters," she said in an excited
whisper and stroked Knulp's hand. "Just reach in through the
opening, it will be on the windowsill."
"Thank you," said Knulp, and withdrew his hand in
embarrassment.
"Can I save you a mug of beer?" she asked, pressing gently
close to him.
"No, thanks. I don't usually drink any at night. Good night,
Frau Rothfuss, and thank you."
She gave his arm a squeeze and whispered affectionately:
"Are you in such a hurry?" Her face was close to his and in the

awkward silence, not wishing to push her away forcibly, he ran
his hand over her hair.
"But now I must be going," he said in an exaggeratedly loud
voice, and stepped back.
She smiled at him with parted lips, he could see her teeth
shining in the darkness. And very softly she said: "Then I'll wait
till you come home. You're a dear."
He walked quickly away into the dark street with his
umbrella under his arm, and at the next corner, to get rid of his
silly uneasiness, he began to whistle the tune of a song:
You think I'm going to take you.
Oh no, you're not for me.
Shame makes me want to shake you
When I'm in company.
The air was balmy, and here and there a star appeared in the
black sky. In one of the inns some young people were having a
boisterous Saturday night, and behind the windows of the new
bowling alley at the Peacock he saw a group of substantial
citizens in shirtsleeves, weighing bowling balls in their hands and
smoking cigars.
At the gymnasium Knulp stopped and looked around. The
damp wind sang softly in the bare chestnut trees, the river flowed
soundlessly in the deep darkness, broken only by the reflections
of a window or two. The gentle night soothed the tramp in every
fiber of his being, he sniffed the air with an intimation of spring,
warm weather, and dry roads. His inexhaustible memory surveyed
the city, the river valley, and the whole region; he knew it well, he
knew the roads and the paths along the river, the villages,
hamlets, and farms, and he knew where he could expect a friendly
lodging for the night. He thought hard, planning his next journey
since he could stay in Lдchstetten no longer. But he wanted to
stay over Sunday for his friend's sake, if the woman didn't make it
too hard for him.

Perhaps, he reflected, he ought to have said something to the
tanner about his wife. But he didn't like to meddle in other
people's concerns, and he felt no need to try to make people better
or wiser. He was sorry it had turned out this way, and his feelings
toward the former waitress at the Ox were not at all friendly; but
at the same time he had to laugh when he thought of the tanner's
pompous speeches about the joys of domesticity and marriage. He
knew about these things. When a man boasted of his happiness or
his virtue, they usually didn't amount to much; the same had been
true of the tailor's piety. You could observe people's folly, you
could laugh at them or feel sorry for them, but you had to let them
go their own way.
With a deep sigh he dismissed these matters and, propping
himself against the bend of an old chestnut tree across from the
bridge, turned his thoughts back to his travels. He would have
liked to tramp through the Black Forest, but it was too cold in the
mountains at this season, most likely the ground was still covered
with snow; you ruined your boots, and places to spend the night
were too far apart. No, that wouldn't do. He would have to follow
the valleys and stick to the towns. Stag's Mill, four hours down
the river, was the first reliable stopping place; they would surely
keep him for two days if the weather was bad.
Deep in his thoughts, he had just about forgotten that he was
waiting for someone when a frail frightened figure appeared on
the dark wind-swept bridge and came hesitantly closer. He
recognized her at once; happy and grateful, he ran to meet her,
swinging his hat.
"Bдrbele! How nice of you to come! I'd almost stopped
expecting you."
Walking at her left side, he led her up the river walk. She
was timid and shy.
"I really shouldn't have come," she said over and over again.
"If only nobody sees us!"
But Knulp had all sorts of questions to ask and soon her step
became calmer and steadier. In a little while she was chatting with
him as easily as an old friend. Encouraged by his questions and

comments, she told him about her village, her father and mother,
her brother and grandma, about the ducks and chickens, the
hailstorms and sicknesses, the weddings and fairs. Her little
treasure of experiences opened up, and it was larger than she
herself would have supposed. At length she told him how her
parents had hired her out and she had left home, and went on to
speak of her work and the household she was in.
They were far out of town before Bдrbele gave a thought to
where they were going. Her chatter had set her free from a long
dreary week of loneliness, of doing as she was told and saying
nothing. She was all cheered up.
"But where are we?" she suddenly cried in amazement.
"Where are we going?"
"If it's all right with you, we're going to Gertelfingen, we're
nearly there."
"Gertelfingen? What for? We'd better go back, it's getting
late."
"When do you have to be back, Bдrbele?"
"At ten. Very soon. It's been a nice walk."
"Ten o'clock is a long way off," said Knulp. "I'll see that you
get home on time. But we'll never again be so young together, so I
thought we might risk a dance. Or don't you like to dance?"
She looked at him with eager surprise. "I love to dance. But
where? Out here in the night?"
"Well be in Gertelfingen in a minute and there's music at the
Lion. We could go in for just one dance, and then we'll go home
and we'll have had a fine evening."
Bдrbele stopped still, thinking it over. "It would be fun," she
said slowly. "But what will people think of us? I don't want to be
taken for that kind of girl, and I wouldn't want anybody to think
we're going together either."
Suddenly she laughed gaily and said: "You see, if I have a
sweetheart later on, it mustn't be a tanner. I don't want to offend
you, but tanning is a dirty trade."
"Maybe you've got something there," said Knulp goodnaturedly. "I don't expect you to marry me. But nobody here

knows I'm a tanner or that you're so proud, and I've washed my
hands, so if you'd care to dance once around with me, you're
invited. If not, we'll turn back."
A pale gable belonging to the first house of the village
peered out through the black foliage. Suddenly Knulp said "Pst!"
and lifted a finger: the sound of dance music from the village, an
accordion and a fiddle.
"All right!" Bдrbele laughed and they walked faster.
At the Lion only four or five couples were dancing, all
young people unknown to Knulp. The atmosphere was quiet and
sedate and no one molested the strangers who joined in the next
dance. They danced a lдndler and a polka and then came a waltz.
Bдrbele didn't know how to waltz, so they sat down and had a
drop of beer, which was as far as Knulp's finances went.
Bдrbele was flushed from dancing, and her eyes sparkled as
she looked on.
"I suppose it's time to go," said Knulp at half past nine.
She started in surprise and looked rather sad.
"What a shame!" she said softly.
"We could stay a little longer."
"No. I've got to get back. It's been lovely."
They left the room but at the door something occurred to
Bдrbele: "We haven't given the musicians anything."
"No," said Knulp with some embarrassment. "They deserve
a tenner. The trouble is, I haven't got one."
Eagerly she drew her little knitted purse from her pocket.
"Why didn't you say anything? Here. Give it to them."
He took the coin and gave it to the musicians, then they left.
Outside, they had to wait a few minutes before they could see the
way in the deep darkness. The wind was blowing harder, driving
an occasional raindrop before it.
"Should I put up the umbrella?" Knulp asked.
"No, we'd never get ahead in this wind. It was nice in there.
You dance almost like a dancing master, tanner."

She went on chattering gaily. Her friend had fallen silent,
perhaps because he was tired, perhaps because he dreaded the
impending leave-taking.
All at once she began to sing: "I graze by the Neckar, I graze
by the Rhine." Her voice was warm and pure. At the second verse
Knulp joined in and sang the bass part with such sureness and in
such a fine deep voice that she listened happily.
"Well," he asked at the end, "is your homesickness gone?"
"Oh yes," she said, laughing brightly. "We must take
another walk soon."
"I'm sorry," he said more softly. "I'm afraid this is the last."
She stopped still. She hadn't quite heard the words, but she
had caught the note of dejection.
"But what's wrong?" she asked tremulously. "Are you put
out with me?"
"Of course not, Bдrbele. But I've got to be leaving
tomorrow. I've given notice."
"You don't mean it. Really? Oh, I am sorry to hear that."
"You mustn't be sorry about me. I wouldn't have stayed very
long in any case, and besides I'm only a tanner. You must find a
sweetheart soon, a handsome young fellow. Then you'll never be
homesick again. You'll see."
"Don't talk like that. You know I like you very much, even if
you're not my sweetheart."
They were both silent. The wind whistled round their faces.
Knulp walked more slowly. They were almost at the bridge. At
length he stopped still.
"I'll bid you goodbye now. You'd better go the rest of the
way by yourself."
With sincere affliction Bдrbele looked into his face.
"So it's true? Then let me thank you. I'll never forget this
evening. And good luck."
He clasped her hand and drew her close to him. Frightened
and surprised, she looked into his eyes. Then he took her head
with its rain-wet braids in both hands and whispered: "Goodbye,

Bдrbele. But before I go, I want a kiss from you, so you won't
forget me entirely."
She trembled and shrank back a little, but his eyes were
kindly and sad, and now for the first time she noticed how fine
they were. Gravely, without closing her own, she accepted his
kiss. Then when he stood hesitant, a faint smile on his lips, tears
welled to her eyes and she returned his kiss with warmth.
She walked away quickly and was already on the bridge
when suddenly she turned round and came back. He was still
standing on the same spot.
"What is it, Bдrbele?" he asked. "You must go home."
"Oh yes, I'm going. You mustn't think badly of me."
"Certainly not."
"But tell me, tanner. You said you had no money. Won't you
be paid before you go?"
"No, there's no pay coming to me. But that's nothing. I'll
manage. You mustn't worry."
"No, no! You've got to have something in your pocket.
Here!"
She pressed a large coin into his hand; he knew by the feel
that it was a taler.
"You can give it back to me or send it sometime."
He held her hand.
"It won't do. You mustn't throw your money around like
this. Why, it's a whole taler. Take it back. I insist. If you have
some small change, say fifty pfennigs, I'll take it gladly because
I'm hard up. But no more."
They argued a little longer, and Bдrbele had to show him
her purse, because she said she had nothing but the taler. But this
wasn't true, she also had a mark and one of the little silver twentypfennig pieces that were still current. He wanted to take that, but
she said it wasn't enough; then he said he wouldn't take anything,
but finally he kept the mark piece, and she rushed off.
On the way home she wondered why he hadn't kissed her
again, now with a sense of regret, now with the feeling that in not

kissing her again he had been really sweet and considerate. And
this was the feeling she ended up with.
It was more than an hour later when Knulp came home. He
saw that the light was still on in the big room, which meant that
the tanner's wife was sitting up waiting for him. He spat with
annoyance and thought of running off into the night that very
minute. But he was tired, it was going to rain, and he didn't want
to be unkind to the tanner. And besides he felt like playing a
harmless little joke.
He fished the key out of its hiding place, opened the house
door as stealthily as a thief, closed it behind him, locked it
soundlessly with tight-pressed lips, and carefully put the key in its
place. Then he took off his shoes and climbed the stairs in his
stocking feet. The door to the big room was ajar. He saw light
through the crack and heard the tanner's wife, who had fallen
asleep from the long wait, breathing deeply on the sofa. Then he
climbed silently to his room, locked himself in, and went to bed.
But the next day -- his mind was made up -- he would leave.

My Recollections of Knulp
In those days I was young and gay, and Knulp was still
alive. It was midsummer; the two of us were tramping through
fertile country and had few worries. By day we sauntered through
yellow grain-fields or lay in the cool shade of a walnut tree or at
the edge of the forest, and at night I listened and looked on as
Knulp told the peasants stories, put on shadow plays for the
children, or sang his songs for the girls. I listened with pleasure
and without envy; only when he was standing surrounded by
girls, his tanned face flashing like summer lightning, when for all
their laughing and joking the young things couldn't take their eyes
off him, it occasionally struck me that he was an uncommonly
lucky devil or that I myself was the opposite. And then, sick of
sitting there like a bump on a log, I sometimes crept away by
myself and dropped in on the village priest for a sensible talk and
a night's lodging, or went to the tavern for a quiet glass of wine.
One afternoon, I remember, as we were making our way
through the fields, far from the nearest village, we came to a
deserted graveyard with a little chapel beside it. Surrounded by
walls overgrown with dark shrubbery, it lay friendly and peaceful
in the hot countryside. There were two large chestnut trees at the
entrance. The gate was closed and I wanted to go on. Not so
Knulp, who started climbing over the wall.
"Stopping again?" I asked.
"I think so. I wouldn't want to get sore feet."
"But does it have to be a graveyard?"
"Never mind. Just come along. I know that peasants don't go
in much for pleasure, but when it comes to their last resting place,
they like their comfort. It's worth a bit of trouble to them, they
grow the loveliest things on their graves and all around them."
I joined him in climbing the low wall and saw that he was
right. The graves, most of them marked by white wooden crosses,
lay in straight and crooked rows, and over them grew flowers and
greenery. Bindweed and geraniums sparkled with joy, late

gillyflowers grew in the shadier spots, there were rose bushes
weighed down with roses, and a dense copse of lilac and elder.
We looked about for a while and then sat down in the grass,
which in places was tall and in flower. We rested and cooled off
and a feeling of contentment came over us.
Knulp read the name on the nearest cross and said: "His
name was Engelbert Auer, he lived to be over sixty. But now he's
lying under mignonette, which is a lovely flower, and he's at
peace. I'd be glad to have some mignonette myself when the time
comes; in the meantime, I'll take a little of this."
I said: "Better take something else; mignonette fades so
soon."
However, he broke off a sprig and put it in his hat, which
was lying beside him on the grass.
"How wonderfully quiet it is!" I said.
And he: "Yes, indeed. If it were just a little quieter, we
could hear them talking down there."
"Not them. They've finished talking."
"How do we know? They say that death is sleep; don't we
talk in our sleep now and then? Sometimes we even sing."
"Maybe you do."
"Why not? If I were dead, I'd wait until Sunday when the
girls come out here to look about and pick flowers from the
graves, and then I'd start singing, but very softly."
"What would you sing?"
"What I'd sing? Oh, any old song."
He stretched out on the ground, closed his eyes, and soon
began to sing in a soft, childlike voice:
Because I've died so young,
Come sing me, pretty maidens,
A song of farewell.
When I come back again,
When I come back again,
I'll be a pretty lad.

I couldn't help laughing, though I liked the song. He sang
beautifully, and even if the words didn't always make sense, the
tune was lovely and that was enough.
"Knulp," I said, "don't promise the pretty maidens too much,
or they'll stop listening to you. It's all very well to say you'll come
back, but no one really knows about these things, and how can
you be sure you'll be a pretty lad?"
"No, I can't be sure; that's a fact. But that's what I'd like to
be. Remember the other day, the little boy with the cow that we
asked the way of? I wish I could be like him when I come back.
Don't you?"
"No, not I. I once knew an old man, well over seventy, his
eyes were so quiet and kindly; it seemed to me that everything
about him was kindly and wise and quiet. Ever since then, I've
thought that if I came back I'd want to be like him."
"Well, you've got a long way to go. Altogether it's a funny
thing about wishes. If all I had to do this minute was to nod and
I'd be a nice little boy like that, and all you had to do was nod and
you'd be a kindly old man, neither of us would nod. We'd be quite
pleased to stay just as we are."
"Yes, that's true."
"It's true all right. But that's not all. Sometimes I say to
myself that the most beautiful thing in the world is a slender
young girl with blond hair. But that's nonsense, because often
enough we see a brunette who seems to be almost more beautiful.
And besides, there are other times when I think the most beautiful
thing of all is a bird soaring free in the sky. And another time
nothing seems so marvelous as a butterfly, a white one for
instance with red dots on its wings, or the sun shining in the
clouds at evening, when the whole world is aglow, yet the light
doesn't dazzle us, and everything looks so happy and innocent."
"Right you are, Knulp. Everything is beautiful when you
look at it in a good moment."
"Yes. But there's more to it. The most beautiful things, I
think, give us something else beside pleasure; they also leave us
with a feeling of sadness or fear."

"Why?"
"I mean that a beautiful girl wouldn't seem so beautiful if we
didn't know that she has her season and that when it's over she'll
grow old and die. If a beautiful thing were to remain beautiful for
all eternity, I'd be glad, but all the same I'd look at it with a colder
eye. I'd say to myself: You can look at it any time, it doesn't have
to be today. But when I know that something is perishable and
can't last forever, I look at it with a feeling not just of joy but of
compassion as well."
"I suppose so."
"To me there's nothing more beautiful than fireworks in the
night. There are blue and green fireballs, they rise up in the
darkness, and at the height of their beauty they double back and
they're gone. When you watch them, you're happy but at the same
time afraid, because in a moment it will all be over. The
happiness and the fear go together, and it's much more beautiful
than if it lasted longer. Don't you feel the same way?"
"Yes, I think I do. But that's not true of everything."
"Why not?"
"For instance, if a boy and girl love each other and get
married, or if two people get to be friends, it's beautiful because
it's meant to last and not to end right away."
Knulp looked at me closely; then his black lashes flickered
and he said thoughtfully: "Yes. But that comes to an end too, like
everything else. All sorts of things can wreck a friendship, or a
love for that matter."
"True, but we don't think of that until it happens."
"I don't know about that. -- For instance, I've had two loves
in my life, real ones I mean, and each time I knew it would last
forever and could end only with death, but each time it ended, and
I didn't die. I had a friend too, back home, and I thought we'd
never part. But we did part, long long ago."
He fell silent and I could think of nothing to say. I still had
no experience of the sorrow that is part and parcel of every human
relationship, nor had I learned that no matter how close two
human beings may be, there is always a gulf between them which

only love can bridge, and that only from hour to hour. I pondered
my friend's words; I liked best what he had said about the
fireballs, because I myself had often had the same feeling. The
quiet spell of the colored flame, rising into the darkness and all
too soon drowning in it, struck me as a symbol of all human
pleasure, for the more beautiful it is, the less it satisfies us and the
more quickly it is spent. I told Knulp what I had been thinking.
But he wouldn't go into it. He only said "Yes. . . yes." And
then, after a long while, in a muffled voice: "There's no sense in
all this brooding and pondering; we never do what we think. We
don't stop to reflect, we do what our hearts bid us. But maybe
there's something in what I said about friendship and love. In the
end, we all have a life of our own that we can't share with anyone
else. You can see that when a friend or loved one dies. You weep
and grieve for a day, a month, or even a year, but then the dear
departed is dead and gone, and the person in the coffin might just
as well be some homeless unknown apprentice."
"Don't say that, Knulp, I don't like it. We've often talked
about these things. We've always said that life must have a
meaning and that there is a point in being good and friendly rather
than bad and unfriendly. But the way you're talking now, nothing
makes any difference and we could just as well be thieves and
murderers."
"No, my friend, we couldn't. See if you can bring yourself to
murder the next few people we meet. Or tell a yellow butterfly
that it ought to be blue. It will laugh in your face."
"That's not what I mean. But if nothing matters, then there's
no point in trying to be good and upright. There's no goodness if
blue is as good as yellow and evil is as good as good. Then a man
is the same as an animal in the woods; he simply follows his
nature and there's neither virtue nor guilt."
Knulp sighed.
"What can I say? Maybe you're right. And that's why we get
these stupid fits of gloom, because we feel that our wanting and
trying are meaningless and that things simply go their own way.
But there's guilt even so, even when a man can't help being bad.

Because he's aware of the badness in him. And that's why
goodness must be the right way, because when we do good we're
happy and our conscience is clear."
I could see by his face that he was sick of this discussion.
That often happened with him. He started philosophizing, stated
principles, argued for and against, and then suddenly stopped. At
first I thought he had had enough of my inept answers and
objections. But it wasn't that; he felt that his leaning to
speculation carried him into territory where his knowledge and
means of expression were inadequate. For though he had read a
great deal, Tolstoy for instance, he was not always able to
distinguish between sound and unsound reasoning, and he himself
sensed as much. He spoke of learned men as a gifted child speaks
of adults; he had to admit that they were stronger and better
equipped than he, but he despised them for making no proper use
of their learning and for solving no riddles with all their wisdom.
Now he was lying on his back again with his head cradled in his
hands, peering through the black elder leaves into the hot blue sky
and softly singing an old Rhenish folk song. I still recall the last
stanza:
I've worn the red coat until now,
And now the black coat I must wear
Seven years to the day,
Till my love rots away.

Late in the afternoon we sat facing each other at the dark
edge of a copse, each with a big chunk of bread and half a hard
sausage, eating and watching the night fall. Only a short time
before, the hills had been bright with the yellow glow of the
evening sky, bathed in a fluffy luminous haze; now they were
dark and sharply outlined, painting their trees, bushes, and
meadows on the sky, which still had a little light blue in it but
much more of the dark blue of the night. While there was light

enough, we had read nonsense to each other out of Strains from
the German Hurdygurdy, a little book of idiotic songs illustrated
with small woodcuts. That had ended with the daylight. When we
had done eating, Knulp wanted music. I pulled my harmonica
from my pocket, which was full of crumbs, wiped it, and played
our usual half-dozen tunes. The darkness had spread far over the
rolling countryside, the sky had lost its pale glow and in growing
darker had shot forth one star after another. The light, thin notes
of the harmonica flew over the fields and lost themselves in the
distance.
"It's too early to sleep," I said to Knulp. "Tell me a story -- it
doesn't have to be true -- or a fairy tale."
Knulp thought back.
"All right," he said. "A story and a fairy tale, both in one.
You see, it's a dream. I had this dream last fall and twice more
since then, almost the same. Here it is:
"A narrow street in a small town like the one I come from.
All the houses had gables overlooking the street, but they were
higher than the ones you usually see. I was walking through the
street. It was as though I were coming home after a long long
time, but I wasn't really happy, because something was wrong. I
had a feeling that maybe I was in the wrong place, that this wasn't
my home town at all. Some parts of it were exactly as they should
have been and I recognized them at once, but many houses were
strange and deserted, and I couldn't find the bridge that led to the
marketplace; instead, I passed an unfamiliar garden and a church
that was like in Cologne or Basel, with two big steeples. Our
church at home had no steeple at all, but only a low stump with a
make-shift roof, because the builders had made a mistake and
hadn't been able to finish the steeple.
"It was the same with the people. I recognized some that I
saw in the distance, I knew their names, I had them on my lips
and I was all ready to call out. But most of them went into houses
or side streets and were gone. When one of them came closer, he
turned into a stranger; then when he had passed me and I looked
after him, it seemed to me that he was the man after all and that I

did know him. I saw a group of women standing outside a shop,
and one of them, I thought, was my aunt, who is dead; but when I
went up to them, I no longer recognized her, and they were
speaking a strange dialect that I could hardly understand.
"In the end I thought: Oh, if I could only be gone from here,
it's my old town and then again it isn't. But all the while I kept
seeing a familiar house or a familiar face and rushing up to it, and
every time I was disappointed. But I wasn't angry or vexed, only
sad and afraid; I wanted to say a prayer and tried hard to
remember one, but all I could think of was silly phrases -- such as
'Dear Sir' and 'Under the circumstances' -- and in my sadness and
confusion I went about mumbling these.
"This, it seemed to me, lasted a few hours, until I was
thoroughly hot and tired, and still I stumbled aimlessly from place
to place. By then it was evening and I decided to ask the next
person I met where I could lodge for the night or how to find the
road out of town, but I was unable to speak to anyone, they all
passed me by as though I weren't there. I was so tired and
desperate I thought I'd burst into tears.
"Then suddenly I turned a corner and there was our old
street. It had changed, it looked unreal and ornate, but by then that
didn't trouble me much. I walked along and distinctly recognized
house after house in spite of the dream decorations, and finally I
came to the old house where I grew up. Like the others, it was
unnaturally tall, but otherwise it looked pretty much as it had in
the old days, and I shuddered with joy and excitement.
"In the doorway stood my first love, her name was
Henriette. Except that she was taller and somehow different than
before, and still more beautiful. As I came closer, I saw that there
was something miraculous and angelic about her beauty, but I
also noticed that her hair was golden blond and not brown like
Henriette's; still, it was Henriette from top to toe, though
transfigured.
" 'Henriette!' I cried out, and took off my hat because she
looked so ethereal that I wasn't sure she'd recognize me.

"She turned and looked into my eyes. And as she looked
into my eyes, I was surprised and ashamed, because it wasn't
Henriette but Lisabeth, my second love, whom I had gone with
for years.
"So I cried 'Lisabeth!' and held out my hand.
"She looked at me; her look pierced my heart, as if God had
looked at me; it wasn't severe or proud but clear and calm, yet so
spiritual and lofty that I felt like a dog. And as she looked at me,
she became grave and sad; then she shook her head as if I had
asked an impudent question. She didn't take my hand but went
back into the house and closed the door behind her. I could hear
the lock snap.
"I turned around and went away, and though I was almost
blinded by tears and grief, I saw that the city was strangely
changed. For now every street and every house was exactly as it
had been in the old days, the evil spell was broken. The gables
were no longer so high and the colors were right, the people were
really themselves and looked at me with happy surprise as though
they knew me, and some called me by name. But I couldn't
answer and I couldn't stop to talk with them. Something drove me
across the old familiar bridge and out of the city, and my heart
was so sore that tears clouded everything I saw. I didn't know
why, but it seemed to me that I had lost everything I had in the
city and was running away in disgrace.
"Under the poplars at the edge of the town I stopped to rest.
Only then did it occur to me that I had been right outside our old
home and hadn't given a thought to my father and mother, my
brothers, sisters, and friends. Never had my heart been filled with
such turmoil, grief, and shame. But I couldn't turn back and make
amends, because the dream was over and I woke up."

Knulp said: "Every human being has his soul, he can't mix it
with any other. Two people can meet, they can talk with one
another, they can be close together. But their souls are like
flowers, each rooted to its place. One can't go to another, because

it would have to break away from its roots, and that it can't do.
Flowers send out their scent and their seeds, because they would
like to go to each other; but a flower can't do anything to make a
seed go to its right place; the wind does that, and the wind comes
and goes where it pleases."
And later: "Maybe that's what the dream I told you means. I
didn't wrong Henriette or Lisabeth knowingly. But because I once
loved them both and wanted to make them my own, they became
for me a kind of dream figure, which looks like both of them and
is neither. That figure belongs to me, but it no longer has life. And
I've often had such thoughts about my parents. They think I'm
their child and that I'm like them. But though I love them, I'm a
stranger to them, a stranger they can't understand. And to them
the main part of me, what may actually be my soul, is
unimportant; they put it down to my youth, or to caprice. And yet
they love me and would do anything in the world for me. A father
can pass on his nose and eyes and even his intelligence to his
child, but not his soul. In every human being the soul is new."
I had nothing to say to that, for at the time I hadn't begun to
think along those lines, at least I had felt no inner need to. Such
musings didn't dismay me in the least; they didn't touch my heart
and so I imagined that for Knulp as well they were more a game
than a struggle. Besides, it was so lovely and peaceful to be lying
side by side in the dry grass, waiting for night and sleep and
watching the first stars.
I said: "You're a thinker, Knulp. You ought to have been a
professor."
He laughed and shook his head. "I'd be much more likely to
join the Salvation Army one of these days," he said thoughtfully.
That was too much. "I don't believe you," I said. "Next
you'll be telling me you want to become a saint."
"So I do, so I do. Everybody who's really in earnest about
what he thinks and does is a saint. If he thinks something is right,
he's got to do it. And if one day I think it's right for me to join the
Salvation Army, I hope I'll do it."
"Why the Salvation Army?"

"I'll tell you why. I've spoken with a lot of people and
listened to a lot of speeches. I've listened to priests and
schoolteachers and mayors and Social Democrats and Liberals;
but deep in his heart not a one of them was in earnest; not a one
made me feel that if need be he'd sacrifice himself for his
wisdom. But in the Salvation Army, with all the music and
ruckus, I've seen and heard two or three fellows who were really
in earnest."
"How do you know?"
"Never mind, you can tell. I remember one who was making
a speech in a village square one Sunday. With the heat and the
dust, his voice left him. He didn't look very strong. When he
couldn't get out another word, he let his three companions sing a
verse of a hymn, and he drank a little water. Half the village were
standing around him, children and grownups, they made fun of
him and heckled him. Behind him there was a young farm hand
with a whip. From time to time he snapped it, crack! -- to plague
the speaker, and everybody laughed. But the poor fellow didn't
get angry, though he wasn't stupid; he struggled against the
hubbub with his poor weak voice and smiled where anyone else
would have wept or cursed. You know, a man doesn't do that for
starvation wages or for pleasure; no, there's got to be a great
clarity and certainty inside him."
"Possibly. But the same thing won't do for everybody. A
clever, sensitive man like you couldn't stand all that noise."
"Maybe he could. If he had something and knew something
that was better than all his cleverness and sensitiveness. I know
the same thing won't do for everybody, but the truth has to do."
"Oh, the truth! How do we know that those halleluiah
singers have the truth?"
"You've got something there. We don't know. I'm only
saying that if one day I find it's the truth, I'll follow it."
"If! But every day you find some piece of wisdom, and the
next day you give it up."
He looked at me in consternation. "That wasn't a nice thing
to say."

I wanted to apologize, but he stopped me and fell silent. In a
little while he softly said good night and stretched out, but I don't
think he fell asleep right away. I was wide awake myself and lay
there for over an hour propped up on my elbows, peering into the
night.

In the morning I saw right away that this was one of Knulp's
good days. I told him so. He beamed at me out of his childlike
eyes and said: "You've guessed right. And do you know where a
good day like this comes from?"
"No. Where?"
"From sleeping well and dreaming of beautiful things. But
you mustn't remember what they were. That's how it is with me
today. I've dreamed magnificent, joyful things, but I've forgotten
them all; I only know it was wonderful."
Even before we came to the next village and had our
morning milk under our belts, he sang four brand-new songs into
the sober morning in his warm, light, effortless voice. Written out
and printed, these songs might not amount to much. Knulp was
not a great poet, but a poet he was, and while he was singing
them, his little songs often bore a close family resemblance to the
finest songs in the world. Certain passages and lines that I
remember are really beautiful and I still cherish them. They were
never written down; his verses were born, lived, and died like the
breezes, in irresponsible innocence, but they gave beauty and
warmth to many a moment, not only for himself and me but for
many others as well.
That morning he sang the praises of the sun, as he did in
nearly all his songs.
Like a maiden from her door,
Bright and clad in Sunday best,
Blushing and yet proudly, she
Steps up from the mountain crest.

His conversation was often heavy with philosophy, but his
songs had the lightness of children playing in their summer
clothes. Some of them were nothing but whimsical nonsense, a
mere outlet for his high spirits.
That day I was infected by his mood. We called out
greetings to all the people we met and teased them, sometimes
leaving laughter behind us and sometimes abuse, and our whole
day passed like a holiday. We told each other jokes from our
schooldays and recalled schoolboy pranks, we made up
nicknames for the peasants who passed and sometimes for their
horses and oxen, we stopped by a garden fence that could not be
seen from the road and stuffed ourselves full of gooseberries, and
we economized on energy and shoe leather by taking a rest every
hour or so.
It seemed to me that never in the course of our brief
friendship had I seen Knulp so merry and bright and entertaining.
This, I thought to my delight, was the true beginning of our happy
vagrant life together.
By midday the heat grew oppressive and we spent more
time lying in the grass than walking. Late in the afternoon, storm
clouds gathered, the air was still and sultry, and we decided to
seek shelter for the night.
Knulp became less talkative; he was a little tired, but I
hardly noticed it, for he continued to laugh heartily when I
laughed and to sing when I sang. I myself became more exuberant
than ever, as though fireworks were flaring up inside me. It may
have been the exact opposite with Knulp; perhaps his holiday
lights had begun to die down. I was always like that at the time.
On a good day, I grew more and more lively toward nightfall; if I
had been enjoying myself, I couldn't stop; many a time I roamed
about for hours all by myself, long after the others had gone
wearily to sleep.
My afternoon exuberance took hold of me that day.
Descending the valley, we came to a good-sized village and I
looked forward to a riotous night. First we selected our night
lodging, an easily accessible barn off to one side, then we went

into the village and sat down in the garden of an inn, for I had
asked my friend to be my guest that evening. Since it was a day of
rejoicing, I thought we'd have pancakes and a few bottles of beer.
Knulp had accepted the invitation gladly. But when we were
seated at a table under a magnificent plane tree, he said with some
embarrassment: "No drinking bout, eh? I'll be glad to drink a
bottle of beer, it will do me good and I'll enjoy it, but that's about
all I can take."
I didn't argue. I thought: We'll have as much or as little as
we please. We ate the hot pancakes with good fresh rye bread. I
have to admit I ordered a second bottle of beer while Knulp's first
bottle was still half full. I was overjoyed to be at such a nice inn
again, sitting so grandly and comfortably, and I was in no hurry to
leave.
When Knulp had finished his bottle of beer, I offered him
another but he declined; instead, he suggested that we take a little
walk around the village and go to bed early. This wasn't at all
what I had in mind. I couldn't tell him so directly, but since my
bottle wasn't empty yet, I raised no objection to his leaving ahead
of me; we'd find each other later on.
And leave he did. I watched him as he descended the two or
three steps and with his easy, carefree holiday gait made his way
down the broad street leading to the center of the village. He had
a starflower behind his ear. I was sorry he hadn't wanted to join
me in another bottle of beer, but as I looked after him I thought
affectionately: What a fine fellow!
Meanwhile, the sun had disappeared, the heat became more
oppressive. In such weather I enjoyed sitting quietly over a cool
drink. I settled myself comfortably at my table and prepared to
stay awhile. Since I was just about the only guest, the waitress
had plenty of time to chat with me. I ordered two cigars. One of
them was originally intended for Knulp, but after a while I forgot
that and smoked it myself.
About an hour later Knulp came back and tried to take me
away. But I had grown roots. He said he was tired, and we agreed
that he should go to our sleeping place and lie down. And he left

me. No sooner had he gone than the waitress began to question
me about him; the girls always took a shine to him. I didn't mind,
he was my friend and she wasn't my sweetheart. I sang his
praises, for I was feeling fine and I loved the whole world.
It was beginning to thunder and the wind was whistling
softly in the plane tree when finally, very late, I prepared to leave.
I paid, gave the girl a tenner, and started off without haste. I had
gone some time without drinking, and now I felt that I'd had a
bottle too many. But I could hold my drink and my bit of tipsiness
only made me gay. I sang as I went, and after a while I found our
sleeping quarters. I went in quietly. As I expected, I found Knulp
asleep. He had spread out his brown jacket and lay on it in his
shirtsleeves. His forehead, his bare neck, and one outstretched
hand shone pale in the half darkness.
Knulp
Three Tales from the Life of Knulp
by Hermann Hesse
Translation first published in 1971
Contents
EARLY SPRING
MY RECOLLECTIONS OF KNULP
THE END
Knulp
Early Spring
Once, early in the nineties, our friend Knulp had to go to the
hospital for several weeks. It was mid-February when he was
discharged and the weather was abominable. After only a few
days on the road, he felt feverish again and was obliged to think
about getting a roof over his head. He had always had plenty of
friends, he would have met with a friendly reception in almost
every town in the region. But he was strangely proud about such
things and any friend from whom he accepted help could take it
as an honor.
This time he remembered Emil Rothfuss, the tanner in
Lдchstetten, and at nightfall, amid rain and west wind, he
knocked at the tanner's door. Rothfuss opened the shutters a crack
and shouted down into the dark street: "Who's there? Can't it wait
until daylight?"
Tired as he was, Knulp perked up at the sound of his friend's
voice. He remembered a little song he had made up years before
when he and Rothfuss had been traveling companions for a
month, and started to sing it:
A man walked into the hotel
After the day was done.
I know those tired features well,
It must be the Prodigal Son.
The tanner opened the shutters wide and leaned far out of
the window.
"Knulp! Is it you, or is it your ghost?"
"It's me!" cried Knulp. "But you can come down the stairs,
you don't have to jump out the window."
Happily the tanner ran down and opened the little front door.
Knulp had to blink when his friend held the smoking oil lamp up
to his face.
"And now, get inside!" Rothfuss cried out excitedly,
drawing his friend into the house. "You can tell me all about it
later. There's some supper left. And there's a bed for you too.
Good God, what weather to be out in! Have you got decent shoes
at least?"
Disregarding his questions and astonishment, Knulp stopped
on the stairs to unfold his turned-up trouser cuffs, then climbed
through the half light with assurance, though he had not set foot
in the house for four years.
In the hallway outside the door to the big room, he hesitated.
The tanner bade him go in, but Knulp took him by the hand and
held him back.
"Hold on," he whispered. "It seems you're married now."
"That's right."
"Well, you see. Your wife doesn't know me. Maybe she
won't be glad to see me. I wouldn't want to be in the way."
"Ho-ho! In the way!" Rothfuss laughed, opened the door
wide, and pushed Knulp into the brightly lit room. Over the
dining table a large oil lamp hung on three chains. A light cloud
of tobacco smoke hovered in mid-air; thin wisps of smoke floated
over to the hot lamp-chimney, where they whirled up swiftly and
vanished. On the table lay a newspaper and a pouch full of
tobacco. The tanner's young wife jumped up from the little sofa
on the far side of the room with embarrassed, not quite genuine
alacrity, as if she had been awakened from a nap and didn't want
to show it. For a moment Knulp blinked at her as though dazed by
the glare, then looked into her light-gray eyes and held out his
hand with a polite compliment.
"Well," said the tanner. "Here she is. And this is Knulp, my
friend Knulp that I've told you about. Naturally he'll stay with us,
we'll give him the journeyman's bed. Luckily it's empty. But first
we'll have a drink of cider together, and Knulp must have
something to eat. Wasn't there some liver sausage left?"
The tanner's wife rushed out of the room and Knulp looked
after her.
"She's kind of frightened," he said in an undertone. But
Rothfuss wouldn't agree.
"No children yet?" Knulp asked.
At that point she came back, bringing the sausage on a
pewter plate. She set it down beside the breadboard, on which she
had placed half a loaf of bread with the cut side down. A carved
inscription ran round the circular breadboard: Give us this day our
daily bread.
"Lis, do you know what Knulp just asked me?"
"Forget it," said Knulp. And with a smile he turned to the
lady of the house: "By your leave, ma'am."
But Rothfuss wouldn't forget it.
"If we had no children. That's what he asked me."
"Goodness!" she laughed, and left the room again.
"You haven't got any?" Knulp asked when she was gone.
"No, not yet. She's taking her time. It's better that way for
the first few years. But dig in, and I hope you like it."
The tanner's wife brought in the gray and blue earthenware
cider pitcher, set down three glasses, and filled them. Her
movements were deft. Knulp watched her and smiled.
"Your health, old friend!" cried the tanner, holding out his
glass. But Knulp was a gentleman. "Ladies first," he said. "Your
health, ma'am. Prosit, old man!"
They clinked glasses and drank. Beaming with pleasure,
Rothfuss winked at his wife and asked her if she had noticed what
fine manners his friend had.
She had noticed from the start.
"Herr Knulp is more polite than you," she said. "He knows
what's right and proper."
"Nonsense," said the guest. "We all do what we've learned.
When it comes to manners, you could easily put me to shame.
And how beautifully you set the table, like at the finest hotel!"
"Doesn't she!" said the tanner, and laughed. "But that too
was learned."
"Really? Where? Was your father a hotelkeeper?"
"No, he's been dead for years. I hardly knew him. But I
waited on table for several years at the Ox. Maybe you've heard
of it?"
"The Ox? Why, that used to be the best inn in Lдchstetten."
"It still is. Isn't it, Emil? Nearly all our guests were traveling
salesmen and tourists."
"I believe you, ma'am. I'm sure you had a pleasant life and
made good money. But a home of your own is even better."
After neatly removing the skin and setting it aside on his
plate, he slowly and with visible relish spread the soft sausage on
his bread. From time to time he took a swallow of the good
yellow cider. The tanner looked on with respectful appreciation,
as Knulp's slender, delicate hands went through the necessary
motions so neatly and easily, and the lady of the house also took
pleasure in watching him.
"I must say you don't look so good," the tanner remarked
critically, and Knulp had to admit that he had not been well of late
and had been in the hospital. But he passed over the unpleasant
parts of his story. His friend asked him what he meant to do next
and warmly offered to keep him as long as he liked. That was
exactly what Knulp had expected and counted on, but as though
smitten with bashfulness, he merely thanked him offhandedly and
postponed the discussion of such matters.
"We can talk about that tomorrow or the day after," he said
negligently. "Thank goodness the world isn't coming to an end.
Anyway, I'll stay here a little while."
He disliked making plans or promises too much ahead. He
felt uncomfortable unless the morrow was his to dispose of as he
pleased.
"If I should really stay here a while," he said after a time,
"you'll have to put me down as your journeyman."
"That's rich!" said the tanner with a laugh. "You my
journeyman! Anyway, you're not a tanner!"
"That doesn't matter. Don't you see? Tanning means nothing
to me. It's said to be a fine trade, but I have no talent for work.
But it would look good in my roadbook. I'd be eligible for sick
pay."
"Can I see your book?"
Knulp reached into the inside pocket of his almost new suit
and took out his roadbook, neatly enfolded in an oilcloth case.
The tanner looked at it and laughed. "Spotless! It looks as if
you'd left your mother only yesterday morning."
He studied the entries and official stamps and shook his
head with profound admiration. "What splendid order! With you,
everything has to be just right."
Keeping his roadbook in order was indeed one of Knulp's
hobbies. In its dazzling perfection, his roadbook was a delightful
fiction, a poem. Each of the officially accredited entries bore
witness to a glorious station in an honest, laborious life. The only
seemingly discordant feature was his restlessness, attested by
frequent changes of residence. The life certified by this official
passport was a product of Knulp's invention, and with infinite art
he spun out the fragile thread of this pseudo-career. In reality,
though he did little that was expressly prohibited, he carried on
the illegal and disdained existence of a tramp. Of course, he
would hardly have been so unmolested in his lovely fiction if the
police had not been well disposed toward him. They respected the
cheerful, entertaining young fellow for his superior intelligence
and occasional earnestness, and as far as possible left him alone.
He had seldom been arrested and never convicted of theft or
mendicancy, and he had highly respected friends everywhere.
Consequently, he was indulged by the authorities very much as a
nice-looking cat is indulged in a household, and left free to carry
on an untroubled, elegant, splendidly aristocratic and idle
existence.
"But that's enough now," he said, taking back his papers.
"You'd have been in bed long ago if I hadn't turned up." And,
with a compliment to the lady of the house, he arose.
"Come along, Rothfuss, and show me my bed." The tanner
lighted him up the narrow stairway to the journeyman's room on
the top floor. Against the wall stood an empty iron bedstead and a
wooden bed that was made up.
"Would you like a hot-water bottle?" asked the tanner in a
fatherly tone.
"Don't rub it in," said Knulp with a laugh. "Naturally a
master tanner like you wouldn't need one, now that he has such a
pretty little wife."
"Exactly," said Rothfuss with enthusiasm. "Here you are
getting into a cold attic bed, and sometimes there's no bed at all
and you have to sleep in the hay. When an honest craftsman like
me has a house and business and a nice wife. If you'd only wanted
to, you could have been a master craftsman long ago and be doing
better than me."
Meanwhile Knulp had hurriedly undressed and crawled
shivering between the cold sheets.
"Go on, go on," he said. "I'm comfortable and ready to
listen."
"I meant it seriously, Knulp."
"So did I, Rothfuss. But you mustn't get the idea that
marriage is your invention. Good night now."
Next day Knulp stayed in bed. He still felt rather weak, and
in any case he would hardly have gone out of doors in such
weather. In the morning when his friend dropped in, Knulp told
him not to worry about him, just to bring him a dish of soup at
lunchtime.
All day he lay quiet and content in the dim light of the attic
room. The cold and weariness of the road seeped away from him
and he basked in a feeling of sheltered warmth. He listened to the
regular thudding of the rain against the roof and to the fitful gusts
of the warm, soft wind. Now and then he dozed off for half an
hour and occasionally, as long as it was light enough, he leafed
through his traveling library -- a few sheets of paper on which he
had copied poems and sayings, a bundle of newspaper clippings,
and a few pictures that he had cut out of magazines. Among these
he had two favorites, which were creased and worn from frequent
handling. One was the actress Eleonora Duse, the other a sailboat
at sea in a high wind.
From boyhood Knulp had felt drawn to the sea and the north
country; several times he had made a start in that direction, and
once had gone as far as Brunswick. But time and time again a
strange anxiety and homesickness had driven this migrant, who
was always on the move and could never settle down anywhere,
back to South Germany by forced marches. His carefreeness
seemed to leave him when he found himself in a place with a
strange dialect and customs, where no one knew him and where it
was hard for him to keep his legendary roadbook in order.
At noon the tanner brought him soup and bread. He entered
the room quietly and spoke in a frightened whisper; he thought
Knulp must be sick, for he himself had never lain abed in broad
daylight since the days of his measles and chicken pox. Knulp,
who was feeling fine, didn't bother to explain, but merely said he
would be well and up the next day.
Late in the afternoon there was a knock at the door. Knulp
was dozing and made no answer. The tanner's wife tiptoed in,
removed the empty soup dish, and put a bowl of coffee in its
place on the stool beside the bed.
Knulp had heard her come in, but whether because he felt
lazy or merely out of caprice, he kept his eyes closed and gave no
sign of being awake. Standing there with the empty dish in her
hand, the young woman cast a glance at the sleeper, whose head
lay on his arm in its blue-checkered shirtsleeve. Struck by his fine
dark hair and the almost childlike beauty of his carefree face, she
stood a while, looking at the handsome young fellow about whom
her husband had told her such strange stories. She saw the bushy
eyebrows on his clear, delicately modeled forehead, his thin
brown cheeks, his fine red mouth and slender neck, and she liked
what she saw. She thought of the days when, as a waitress at the
Ox, a springtime fancy would come over her and she would let a
handsome young stranger like this one make love to her.
Thoughtful and slightly aroused, she leaned forward a little
to see his whole face. The tin spoon slid off the plate and fell to
the floor, and what with the stillness and embarrassing intimacy
of the place, she was scared to death.
Knulp opened his eyes slowly and unsuspectingly, as though
he had been sound asleep. He turned toward her, shaded his eyes
with his hand for a moment, and said with a smile: "Why, it's Frau
Rothfuss! And she's brought me coffee. A nice bowl of hot
coffee, the very thing I was dreaming about. Thank you, Frau
Rothfuss. By the way, what time is it?"
"Four," she said quickly. "Now drink it while it's hot. I'll
come back later for the bowl."
And out she ran as though she hadn't a moment to spare.
Knulp looked after her and listened as she hastily descended the
stairs. His eyes were thoughtful and he shook his head several
times, then he let out a soft birdlike whistle and turned to his
coffee.
But an hour before dark he began to feel bored. His health
was restored, he was wonderfully rested, and he wanted company.
Contentedly he got out of bed and dressed, crept down the dark
stairs as quietly as a cat, and slipped out of the house unnoticed.
A damp wind was still blowing from the southwest, but the rain
had stopped and there were clear spaces between the clouds.
Sniffing at the air, Knulp sauntered down the darkened
street and across the deserted marketplace. Then he stood in the
open doorway of a blacksmith's shop, watched the apprentices
cleaning up, and, while warming his hands over the dying forge
fire, struck up a conversation with the journeymen. He inquired
about various acquaintances in the town, about deaths and
marriages. The master took him for a fellow blacksmith, for
Knulp knew the language of every trade and the signs by which
its practitioners recognize one another.
Meanwhile Frau Rothfuss was making her evening soup,
fiddling with the iron rings of the little stove, and peeling
potatoes. When she had finished and the soup was safely
simmering on a low fire, she took the kitchen lamp, went into the
big room, and stood before the mirror. In it she found what she
had been looking for: a full face with fresh cheeks and bluish-gray
eyes. Her hair didn't seem quite right, and with a touch or two of
her nimble fingers she put it in order. Then she gave her hands,
which she had washed only a moment before, another wipe on her
apron, picked up the lamp, and went quickly up to the attic.
She knocked at the door of the journeyman's room, first
softly, then a little louder. When there was no answer, she set the
lamp down on the floor and opened the door with both hands,
very cautiously for fear it would creak. Then she entered on her
tiptoes, took one step, and ran her hands over the stool by the
bedside.
"Are you asleep?" she asked in a soft voice. And then again:
"Are you asleep? I've come to clear away the coffee things."
When there was no sound, not so much as a breath, she
stretched out her hand toward the bed, but quickly withdrew it
with an eerie feeling, and went out for the lamp. Finding the room
empty, the bed carefully made, and even the pillows and
featherbed shaken out, she rushed back down to the kitchen in
confusion, torn between fright and disappointment.
Half an hour later, when the tanner had come in to supper
and she had already set the table, she began to worry. But she was
afraid to tell her husband about her visit to the attic room. Just
then the outer gate opened, soft steps passed over the paved
corridor and up the winding stairs, and there stood Knulp. He
took off his trim brown felt hat and wished them good evening.
"Great guns!" the tanner cried out in consternation. "Where
have you been? He's sick and off he goes, running around in the
night! You'll catch your death."
"Right you are," said Knulp. "I see I'm just on time, Frau
Rothfuss. I smelled your fine soup way over at the marketplace.
That will keep my death away from me."
They sat down to eat. The master of the house was feeling
talkative, he sang the praises of his home life and the advantages
of being a master craftsman. He teased his guest and then lectured
him in earnest; it was high time that he stopped gadding about
doing nothing. Knulp listened but said little in reply, and the
tanner's wife didn't open her mouth. She was annoyed with her
husband, who struck her as uncouth compared to the handsome
and well-mannered Knulp, and she showed her good opinion of
the guest by the attentiveness with which she waited on him. At
the stroke of ten, Knulp said good night and asked the tanner to
lend him his razor.
"Did you ever see anybody so clean!" Rothfuss exclaimed.
"The second his chin starts to tickle, his beard has to come off.
Well, good night. I hope you feel better!"
Before going to his room, Knulp leaned out of the little
window at the head of the stairs to take a look at the weather and
see what was going on in the neighborhood. The wind had died
down and between the roofs there was a black patch of sky
studded with clear, damply shimmering stars.
He was about to pull in his head and close the window when
suddenly the little window across from him, in the house next
door, lighted up. He saw a small, low room very much like his
own; a young servant girl had come in, holding a brass
candlestick in one hand and in the other a large water pitcher,
which she set down on the floor. Then she held the candle over
her narrow bed. Covered with a coarse red blanket, it was plain
but neat, and invited sleep. She put the candlestick down, he
could not see where, and seated herself on a low green-painted
wooden box, the typical servant girl's trunk.
The moment this unexpected scene began to unfold, Knulp
had blown out his own candle, so as to avoid being seen, and now
he stood quietly peering out of his window.
The girl across the way was the kind that appealed to him.
She may have been eighteen or nineteen, not very tall, with an
attractive olive complexion, brown eyes, and thick brown hair.
Her pleasant, quiet face did not look exactly happy; all in all, she
seemed rather woebegone as she sat there on her hard green box,
and Knulp, who knew the world and young girls as well, had a
pretty fair idea that the poor thing hadn't left her native village
very long ago with her box, and was homesick. Holding her thin,
dark-skinned hands in her lap, she sought brief comfort in sitting
for a little while on her meager possessions and thinking of home.
As motionless in his window as she was in her room, Knulp
peered with strange eagerness into this unknown human life, so
innocently nursing its sweet sorrow in the candlelight without a
thought that someone might be watching. He saw her kindly
brown eyes, now unconcealed, now covered by long lashes, he
saw the red light playing softly over her dark, childlike cheeks,
and as he watched her slender young hands on the dark-blue
cotton of her lap, he knew they were tired and resting awhile
before getting down to undressing -- the day's last chore.
At last the girl raised her head with its heavy pinned-up
braids, heaved a sigh, looked dreamily but no less sorrowfully out
into the void, and then bent down to untie her shoelaces.
Knulp was reluctant to leave his post, but it struck him as
wrong and almost cruel to watch the poor child undressing. He
would have liked to call out to her and chat with her a while, to
make some joke that would send her to bed a little happier. But he
was afraid she would take fright and blow out her candle if he
called to her.
Instead, he resorted to one of his many arts. He began to
whistle. The sound was so faint that it seemed to come from the
distance. He whistled the folk song "In a cool green valley, a mill
wheel turns all day," and he managed to make his whistling so
frail and delicate that the girl listened for some time without
knowing quite what it was. It was only at the third stanza that she
slowly stood up and went to the window.
She leaned out and listened, while Knulp went on whistling.
For a few measures she wagged her head in time with the tune.
Then suddenly she looked up and saw where it came from.
"Is there somebody over there?" she asked in a whisper.
"Only a tanner's apprentice," he answered just as softly. "I
didn't mean to prevent you from sleeping. I was a little homesick,
so I thought I'd whistle a tune. But I also know some cheerful
ones. -- Are you a stranger here too?"
"I'm from the Black Forest."
"Ah, from the Black Forest. So am I. How do you like it
here in Lдchstetten? I don't like it at all."
"Oh, I don't know yet, I've only been here a week. But I
don't really like it much. Have you been here long?"
"No, only three days. What village are you from?"
"You wouldn't know it."
"You never can tell. Or is it a secret?"
"Achthausen. It's only a hamlet."
"But a pretty one. The first thing you see is a chapel. Then
there's a mill, a sawmill I think it is, and they've got a big yellow
St. Bernard. Am I right or wrong?"
"My goodness, that's Bello!"
When she saw that he knew her village and had actually
been there, the greater part of her suspicion left her; she perked up
and asked eagerly: "Do you know Andres Flick?"
"No, I don't know anybody there. That's your father, isn't
it?"
"Yes."
"Then you must be Frдulein Flick, and when I find out your
first name I'll be able to write you a postcard the next time I pass
through Achthausen."
"Do you want to leave here so soon?"
"No, I don't want to. But I want to know your name,
Frдulein Flick."
"But I don't know yours either."
"I'm sorry about that, but it's easily mended. My name is
Karl Eberhard. Now if we meet in the daytime you know what to
call me, but what am I to call you?"
"Barbara."
"Thanks. That's fine. But it's a hard name to pronounce and
I'm almost willing to bet they called you Bдrbele at home."
"Yes, they did. But if you know everything, why do you ask
so many questions? And now it's time to go to sleep. Good night,
tanner."
"Good night, Frдulein Bдrbele. Sleep well, and just because
it's you, I'll whistle another tune. Don't run away, there's no
charge."
He started right in and whistled a flamboyant yodel-like tune
full of trills and turns, which leapt and sparkled like dance music.
Amazed at his skill, she listened to the end. When he had done,
she slowly drew the shutters tight and fastened them, while Knulp
found his way to his room in the dark.
Next morning Knulp got up early and made use of the
tanner's razor. But the tanner had worn a full beard for years and
the razor was so neglected that Knulp had to hone it on his
suspenders for half an hour before it would cut. When he had
finished, he put on his coat, picked up his shoes, and went down
to the kitchen, where it was warm and already smelled of coffee.
He asked the tanner's wife for a brush and polish for his
shoes.
"Go 'long!" she cried. "That's not the kind of work for a
man. Let me do it."
But that he would not allow, and when finally with an
awkward laugh she set down the brush and polish before him, he
did the work thoroughly, neatly, and with playful ease, like a man
who did manual labor only very occasionally, when in the mood,
but then cheerfully and with great care.
"Beautiful!" said the tanner's wife admiringly, and looked at
him. "As shiny as if you were going to see your sweetheart."
"Oh, I wish I were."
"I believe you. I'll bet you've got a pretty one." She laughed
again insinuatingly. "Maybe more than one?"
"Oh, that wouldn't be nice," said Knulp reproachfully. "I can
show you a picture of her."
She stepped eagerly closer as he drew his oilcloth portfolio
from his pocket and took out the picture of Duse. She studied it
with interest.
"She's high-class," she began cautiously. "Almost like a real
lady. But kind of skinny. Is her health all right?"
"Oh yes, as far as I know. But now I'll go say hello to the
old man. I can hear him in the big room."
He went into the room and bade the tanner good morning.
The room had been swept and looked friendly and homelike with
its light-colored paneling, its clock, its mirror, and the
photographs on the wall. A cozy room like this, thought Knulp,
isn't bad in the winter, but it's not really worth marrying for. The
favor shown him by the tanner's wife gave him no pleasure at all.
When they had had their coffee he went out in back with
Rothfuss, who showed him through the tannery. Knulp knew
almost every trade and amazed his friend by his knowledgeable
questions.
"How do you know all that?" he asked with animation.
"Anyone would think you were a journeyman tanner, or at least
that you'd been one."
"A traveling man learns all sorts of things," said Knulp
modestly. "Come to think of it, I learned about tanning from you.
Don't you remember? Six or seven years ago, when we were on
the road together. I made you tell me all about it."
"And you still remember all that?"
"Some of it, Rothfuss. But I won't take up any more of your
time. Too bad, I'd have liked to give you a hand, but it's so damp
and stuffy down there, and I've still got this cough. Goodbye for
now, old man, I'll take a little turn in town while the rain holds
off."
And neatly brushed, his brown felt hat tilted back just a
little, he sauntered off with a light, jaunty step, carefully skirting
the puddles. Rothfuss stood in the doorway looking after him.
"Lucky man," the tanner reflected with a twinge of envy.
And on his way to the tanning pits Rothfuss thought about his
eccentric friend who wanted nothing of life but to look on, and
the tanner could not have said whether this was asking too much
or too little. A man who worked hard and got ahead was better off
in many ways, but he could never have such delicate, graceful
hands or walk with so light and jaunty a step. No, Knulp was right
in doing what his nature demanded and what few others could do,
in speaking to strangers like a child and winning their hearts, in
saying pleasant things to ladies of all ages, and making Sundays
out of weekdays. You could only take him as he was, and when
he needed a roof over his head, it was a pleasure and an honor to
give him one; indeed, you almost wanted to thank him, for he
brought lightness and gaiety into the house.
Meanwhile his guest, happy and alert with curiosity, strolled
through the town, whistling a military march through his teeth,
and, taking his time about it, sought out the places and people he
knew from former days. First he climbed a steep hill to an
outlying slum where he knew an unfortunate tailor, Schlotterbeck
by name, who was forever mending old trousers and was seldom
given a new suit to make. A great pity, for he was skilled at his
trade, he had started out with high hopes and worked in good
shops. But he had married young, he already had several children,
and his wife had little talent for housekeeping.
Knulp found the tailor on the third floor of a house set back
from the street. His little workshop hung like a bird's nest over the
void, for the house was built on the hillside, and when you looked
down from the windows, you not only had the three stories below
you but further on a steep slope covered with pathetic slanting
gardens and patches of grass and ending in a gray confusion of
chicken coops, rabbit hutches, and woodsheds; the nearest roofs
that could be seen lay far below, at the bottom of the valley.
However, the workshop was light and airy, and as he sat crosslegged on his big table by the window the tailor could look out
over the world like a lighthouse keeper.
"Morning, Schlotterbeck," said Knulp, stepping into the
room. Blinded by the bright light, the tailor narrowed his eyes and
peered in the direction of the door.
"Ah, Knulp!" he cried joyfully and held out his hand. "Back
in town? And what's wrong, to bring you all the way up here?"
Knulp pulled up a three-legged stool and sat down. "Give
me a needle and a bit of your very best brown wool, I want to
check my equipment."
He removed his coat and vest, selected his yarn, threaded a
needle, and with vigilant eyes inspected his whole suit, which still
looked as good as new. Whenever he discovered a thin spot, a
loose trimming, or a button that was not quite tight, he set it to
rights with nimble fingers.
"And how are you otherwise?" Schlotterbeck asked. "The
weather hasn't been so good. But then if a man has his health and
no family. . ."
Knulp cleared his throat argumentatively.
"Yes, of course," he said wearily. "The Lord sends down His
rain on righteous and unrighteous alike, and only the tailors keep
dry. But you're never satisfied, are you, Schlotterbeck?"
"Oh, Knulp. I'm not complaining. But listen to the children
screaming in there. There are five of them now. Here I sit,
working my fingers to the bone till late at night, and it's never
enough. And all you do is gad about."
"Wrong, my friend. I was in the hospital for four or five
weeks in Neustadt, and they don't keep a man a minute longer
than he absolutely needs, and nobody'd stay any longer anyway.
The ways of the Lord are strange, friend Schlotterbeck."
"Keep your pious sayings to yourself."
"Lost your religion, eh? I've just been trying to get religion
and that's why I came to see you. I want you to tell me all about
it."
"Don't bother me with religion! In the hospital, you say? I'm
sorry to hear that."
"Never mind, it's over now. I want you to tell me about
Ecclesiasticus and Revelation. You see, I had plenty of time in the
hospital, and they had a Bible. I read nearly all of it, so now I can
put in a word too. A curious book, the Bible."
"You've got something there. It's curious, all right. Half of it
must be lies, because nothing fits together. Maybe you understand
it better, because you went to Latin school."
"I don't remember much of that."
"You see, Knulp. . ." The tailor spat through the open
window and stared. There was bitterness in his face. "Religion is
no good. It's no good and I'm through with it. Through with it."
The vagrant looked at him thoughtfully. "Really? Aren't you
going too far, old friend? It seems to me there are some very good
things in the Bible."
"Sure. And when you read a little further you always find
the opposite. No, I'm fed up with it. Fed up."
Knulp had risen and picked up an iron.
"You could put a few chunks of coal on the fire," he
suggested.
"What for?"
"I'd like to iron my vest a little, and it won't do my hat any
harm either, after all that rain."
"Still the same old dandy!" cried Schlotterbeck with a note
of irritation. "What's the good of dressing like a duke when you're
half starved?"
Knulp smiled serenely. "It looks better and it gives me
pleasure, and if you don't want to do it out of piety, just do it to be
nice and to please an old friend."
The tailor left the room and soon came back with a hot iron.
"That's fine," said Knulp. "Thank you."
Cautiously he began to smooth the brim of his hat. But he
was not as skillful at ironing as he was at sewing; his friend took
the iron out of his hand and did it himself.
"That's very kind of you," said Knulp. "Now it's a Sunday
hat again. But look here, tailor, you ask too much of the Bible.
The way I see it, everybody's got to figure out for himself what's
true and what life is like; those are things that you can't learn from
any book. The Bible is old; in those days people didn't know a
good many things that we know today; but for that very reason
there are a lot of fine things in it, and true things too. Parts of it, I
thought, were like a beautiful picture book. The way that girl --
Ruth -- goes through the fields gleaning, that's beautiful, you can
smell the warm summer in it, or the way the Saviour sits down
with the little children and thinks: You mean a lot more to me
than all those grownups with their pride! If you ask me, he was
right, and we can learn from him."
"Yes," Schlotterbeck admitted, "that's a fact. But it's easier
to do that with other people's children than to have five of your
own and not know how you're going to feed them."
He relapsed into bitter gloom and Knulp couldn't bear to see
him that way. He resolved that before leaving he would say
something to cheer him up. He thought a little while, then he
leaned toward the tailor, looked earnestly into his face with his
bright eyes, and said softly: "But don't you love your children?"
The tailor stared at Knulp in horror. "Of course I do! How
can you say such a thing? Of course I love them, especially the
oldest."
Knulp nodded earnestly.
"I'm going now, Schlotterbeck, and many thanks. My vest is
worth twice as much now. -- But you've got to be kindly and
cheerful with your children, that's food and drink to them. And
now listen, I'm going to tell you something that nobody knows
and that you needn't repeat."
Mollified, the tailor looked attentively into Knulp's clear
blue eyes, which had grown grave. Knulp spoke so softly that the
tailor had difficulty in understanding him.
"Look at me! You envy me. You think: he has no family and
no worries. But you're all wrong. I have a child, a little fellow two
years old. He was taken in by strangers because his father was
unknown and his mother died in childbed. There's no need for you
to know what city he's in, but I know, and when I go there I creep
up to the house. I stand by the fence and wait, and when I'm in
luck I see the little fellow. But I can't hold out my hand to him or
give him a kiss; the most I can ever do is whistle a tune for him as
I go by. -- Well, that's how it is, goodbye now, and be glad you
have children."
Knulp continued on his way through the town. He stood for
a while chatting at the window of a turner's shop and watched the
swift play of the curly wood shavings. Farther on he stopped to
say hello to the constable, who was devoted to him and held out
his birchwood snuffbox. Wherever he went, old friends related the
lesser and greater incidents of family and workshop, he heard of
the untimely death of the municipal accountant's wife and of how
the mayor's son had been misbehaving, and in return he reported
on events in other towns, taking pleasure in the tenuous, goodhumored ties which he, as friend, acquaintance, and sharer of
secrets, had formed here and there with the more settled members
of the population. It was Saturday. He stopped in the gateway of a
brewery to ask the journeymen coopers where there would be
dancing that evening and the next day.
There were several places, but the best was the Lion at
Gertelfingen, only half an hour away. That, he decided, was
where he would take Bдrbele, the girl next door.
It was nearly lunchtime, and as Knulp climbed the stairs of
the Rothfuss house a pleasantly pungent smell came his way. He
stopped still and breathed in the balm with boyish pleasure and
curiosity. Despite the lightness of his step, the tanner's wife had
heard him. She flung open the kitchen door and stood in the
bright opening, clouded in the steam of her cooking.
"Ah, Herr Knulp," she cried out affectionately. "I'm glad
you're so early. You see, we're having liver dumplings, and I
thought maybe I could fry up a slice of liver just for you, if you
like. How do you feel about it?"
Knulp stroked his cheek and made a courtly gesture.
"Why should there be something special for me? I'll be only
too happy with a dish of soup."
"That's no way to talk. When a man's been sick, he needs
proper nourishment, he's got to get his strength back. But maybe
you don't care for liver. Some people don't."
He laughed modestly. "Oh, I'm not one of those. A dish of
liver dumplings is a Sunday dinner. If I could have them every
Sunday of my life, I'd be perfectly happy."
"While you're staying with us you must have everything you
want. What did I learn to cook for? Just speak up. There's an extra
slice of liver, I've saved it for you. It would do you good."
She came closer and gave him an encouraging smile. He
understood quite well what she meant, and she was rather pretty,
but he pretended not to notice. He played with his fine hat that the
poor tailor had ironed, and looked to one side.
"Thank you, Frau Rothfuss. Thank you for your kindness.
But I really prefer dumplings. You've been spoiling me enough as
it is."
She smiled and threatened him with her forefinger. "You
don't have to act so bashful. It doesn't convince me anyway.
Dumplings then. With plenty of onions, eh?"
"I can't say no to that."
She went busily back to her stove, while he went into the big
room, where the table had already been laid. He sat reading
yesterday's paper until the tanner came in and the soup was
served. When the meal was over, the three of them played cards
for a little while, and Knulp amazed his hostess with a few
hazardous and graceful new card tricks. He had a playfully
negligent way of shuffling and then gathering up the deck with
the speed of lightning; he tossed his card on the table with an
elegant gesture and occasionally ran his thumb over the edge of
his cards. The tanner watched him with the admiration and
indulgence that unprofitable skills arouse in a hardworking
citizen. But his wife observed these signs of savoir-vivre with
knowing interest. Her eyes rested attentively on his long graceful
hands, which no hard work had ever disfigured.
Through the small windowpanes a thin, uncertain beam of
sunlight poured into the room, passed over the table and the cards,
played fitfully with the faint shadows on the floor and circled
tremulously round the pale-blue ceiling. Knulp's eyes sparkled as
he took it all in: the play of the February sun, the peace and quiet
of the house, his friend's grave, work-hardened face, and the
pretty woman's veiled glances. He didn't like it, this wasn't his
aim in life, this wasn't his kind of happiness. If my health were
better and if it were summer, he thought, I wouldn't stay here an
hour longer.
"I think I'll follow the sun for a while," he said, as Rothfuss
picked up the cards and looked at the clock. He went downstairs
with the tanner, left him in the drying shed with his skins,
and.wandered off through the dismal grass plot which extended,
interspersed with tanning pits, down to the river. There the tanner
had built a little board pier to stand on when washing his skins.
Knulp sat down on the pier, letting his feet dangle over the swift
silent stream, and watched with delight the dark fishes darting
here and there below him. Then he studied his surroundings,
trying to figure out a way of speaking to the little servant girl next
door.
The gardens of the two houses adjoined, separated only by a
broken-down lath fence. Down by the water the fence poles had
long since rotted away and one could pass without difficulty from
one garden to the other. The neighbor's garden seemed better-kept
than the tanner's tangled grass plot. Knulp could see four little
vegetable patches, overgrown with weeds as they are in the
wintertime, two meager borders of lettuce and winter spinach, and
a number of bowed rose bushes, their crowns buried in the
ground. Farther up there were several handsome fir trees, which
hid the house.
After a careful study of the neighbor's garden, Knulp crept
silently as far as the fir trees; between them he could see the
house, with the kitchen in back. He had not long to wait before he
saw the girl, her sleeves rolled up, at work in the kitchen. The
lady of the house was with her, giving orders, showing her one
thing and another, as women must do when, unwilling to pay an
experienced maid, they take on a beginner every year and then are
always full of praises for the girl who has just left. But the tone in
which she instructed and found fault was without malice;
apparently the new girl was already used to it, for she went about
her work calmly and with unruffled brow.
The intruder stood leaning against a tree, watching and
listening with the vigilance of a hunter and the serene patience of
a man whose time is cheap and who has learned to enjoy life as a
spectator. It gave him pleasure to watch the young girl whenever
she appeared in the window. The rest of the time he listened and
gathered from her employer's speech that she was not a native of
Lдchstetten but of some place farther up in the valley. Chewing
on a fragrant fir twig, he listened patiently for half an hour and
then another half hour until at length the lady of the house
disappeared and all was silent in the kitchen.
He waited a little longer, then approached quietly and
tapped on the kitchen window with a dry branch. The girl paid no
attention and he had to knock again. This time she came to the
half-open window, opened it wide, and looked out.
"Goodness, what are you doing here?" she exclaimed in a
whisper. "I almost had a fright."
"How could I frighten anybody?" said Knulp with a smile. "I
just wanted to say hello and see how you were getting along. And
besides, it's Saturday; I wanted to ask if you could take a little
walk with me tomorrow afternoon."
She shook her head; the look on her face was so woebegone
that he felt really sorry for her.
"No," she said in a friendly tone. "I won't be off tomorrow;
only in the morning to go to church."
"Hm," Knulp muttered. "But then you could go out with me
this evening."
"This evening? Well yes, I'll be free, but I mean to write a
letter -- to my people at home."
"Oh, you'll write your letter an hour later, it won't go out
tonight anyway. I'd been so looking forward to a little chat with
you, and we could have such a nice walk this evening, if it doesn't
rain pitchforks. So be nice. You're not afraid of me, are you?"
"I'm not afraid of anybody and certainly not of you. But I
can't. If they see me out walking with a man. . ."
"But Bдrbele, nobody knows you here. Besides, it's no sin
and it's nobody's business. You're not a schoolgirl any more. So
don't forget, I'll be waiting at eight o'clock down by the
gymnasium -- you know, next to the cattle market. Or should I
come earlier? I can if you like."
"No, not earlier. No. . . don't come at all, it's impossible, I
can't. . ."
He displayed his boyish, crestfallen look.
"Well, if you don't feel like it!" he said sadly. "It seemed to
me you were all alone and a stranger here and you must be
homesick sometimes, and me too, and we could have talked a
little. I'd have liked to hear more about Achthausen, because of
being there once. But I can't force you, and don't take it amiss."
"Why would I take it amiss? It's just that I can't."
"You're free this evening, Bдrbele. You just don't want to
come. But maybe you'll change your mind. I've got to go now, but
I'll be outside the gymnasium this evening, and if nobody comes
I'll go for a walk by myself and think of you writing your letter to
Achthausen. So goodbye and no hard feelings."
He gave a quick nod and was gone before she could say
anything more. She saw him vanish behind the trees and a look of
perplexity came over her face. Then she went back to her work
and suddenly she began -- the lady of the house had gone out -- to
sing for all she was worth.
Knulp heard her. He was sitting on the tanner's pier again,
rolling little balls from a piece of bread he had put in his pocket at
lunch. He dropped the bread balls gently into the water one after
another, and watched musingly as they drifted a little way with
the current and sank to the dark bottom, where they were snapped
up by the silent ghostlike fishes.
"Well," said the tanner at supper, "here it is Saturday. You
wouldn't know how good it feels after a hard week."
"Oh, I can imagine," said Knulp with a smile. Frau Rothfuss
smiled, too, and gave him a mischievous look.
"Tonight," Rothfuss went on in a festive tone, "tonight we'll
have a nice jug of beer together, the old lady will go and get it
right away. And tomorrow, if the weather's good, the three of us
will go for a hike. What do you say to that, old friend?"
Knulp gave him a good thump on the shoulder.
"It's a good life here with you, I've got to say that. I'm
looking forward to our hike. But this evening I'll be busy; I have a
friend here; he's been working in the upper blacksmith shop and
he's leaving in the morning. -- I'm sorry, but we'll have all day
tomorrow together, or I wouldn't have arranged it that way."
"But you can't go running around at night when you're still
half sick."
"Oh, it's no good coddling myself too much. I won't be out
late. Where do you keep the key, so I can let myself in?"
"What a stubborn fellow you are! All right, go if you must.
You'll find the key behind the shutters of the basement window.
You know the place?"
"Of course. Well, I'll be going now. Don't stay up for me.
Good night. Good night, Frau Rothfuss."
He went down the stairs and had reached the outer door
when the tanner's wife came running after him. She handed him
an umbrella and, like it or not, Knulp had to take it.
"You must take care of yourself, Knulp," she said. "And
now I'll show you where to find the key."
She took him by the hand in the darkness, led him around in
back, and stopped by a little window.
"We put the key behind the shutters," she said in an excited
whisper and stroked Knulp's hand. "Just reach in through the
opening, it will be on the windowsill."
"Thank you," said Knulp, and withdrew his hand in
embarrassment.
"Can I save you a mug of beer?" she asked, pressing gently
close to him.
"No, thanks. I don't usually drink any at night. Good night,
Frau Rothfuss, and thank you."
She gave his arm a squeeze and whispered affectionately:
"Are you in such a hurry?" Her face was close to his and in the
awkward silence, not wishing to push her away forcibly, he ran
his hand over her hair.
"But now I must be going," he said in an exaggeratedly loud
voice, and stepped back.
She smiled at him with parted lips, he could see her teeth
shining in the darkness. And very softly she said: "Then I'll wait
till you come home. You're a dear."
He walked quickly away into the dark street with his
umbrella under his arm, and at the next corner, to get rid of his
silly uneasiness, he began to whistle the tune of a song:
You think I'm going to take you.
Oh no, you're not for me.
Shame makes me want to shake you
When I'm in company.
The air was balmy, and here and there a star appeared in the
black sky. In one of the inns some young people were having a
boisterous Saturday night, and behind the windows of the new
bowling alley at the Peacock he saw a group of substantial
citizens in shirtsleeves, weighing bowling balls in their hands and
smoking cigars.
At the gymnasium Knulp stopped and looked around. The
damp wind sang softly in the bare chestnut trees, the river flowed
soundlessly in the deep darkness, broken only by the reflections
of a window or two. The gentle night soothed the tramp in every
fiber of his being, he sniffed the air with an intimation of spring,
warm weather, and dry roads. His inexhaustible memory surveyed
the city, the river valley, and the whole region; he knew it well, he
knew the roads and the paths along the river, the villages,
hamlets, and farms, and he knew where he could expect a friendly
lodging for the night. He thought hard, planning his next journey
since he could stay in Lдchstetten no longer. But he wanted to
stay over Sunday for his friend's sake, if the woman didn't make it
too hard for him.
Perhaps, he reflected, he ought to have said something to the
tanner about his wife. But he didn't like to meddle in other
people's concerns, and he felt no need to try to make people better
or wiser. He was sorry it had turned out this way, and his feelings
toward the former waitress at the Ox were not at all friendly; but
at the same time he had to laugh when he thought of the tanner's
pompous speeches about the joys of domesticity and marriage. He
knew about these things. When a man boasted of his happiness or
his virtue, they usually didn't amount to much; the same had been
true of the tailor's piety. You could observe people's folly, you
could laugh at them or feel sorry for them, but you had to let them
go their own way.
With a deep sigh he dismissed these matters and, propping
himself against the bend of an old chestnut tree across from the
bridge, turned his thoughts back to his travels. He would have
liked to tramp through the Black Forest, but it was too cold in the
mountains at this season, most likely the ground was still covered
with snow; you ruined your boots, and places to spend the night
were too far apart. No, that wouldn't do. He would have to follow
the valleys and stick to the towns. Stag's Mill, four hours down
the river, was the first reliable stopping place; they would surely
keep him for two days if the weather was bad.
Deep in his thoughts, he had just about forgotten that he was
waiting for someone when a frail frightened figure appeared on
the dark wind-swept bridge and came hesitantly closer. He
recognized her at once; happy and grateful, he ran to meet her,
swinging his hat.
"Bдrbele! How nice of you to come! I'd almost stopped
expecting you."
Walking at her left side, he led her up the river walk. She
was timid and shy.
"I really shouldn't have come," she said over and over again.
"If only nobody sees us!"
But Knulp had all sorts of questions to ask and soon her step
became calmer and steadier. In a little while she was chatting with
him as easily as an old friend. Encouraged by his questions and
comments, she told him about her village, her father and mother,
her brother and grandma, about the ducks and chickens, the
hailstorms and sicknesses, the weddings and fairs. Her little
treasure of experiences opened up, and it was larger than she
herself would have supposed. At length she told him how her
parents had hired her out and she had left home, and went on to
speak of her work and the household she was in.
They were far out of town before Bдrbele gave a thought to
where they were going. Her chatter had set her free from a long
dreary week of loneliness, of doing as she was told and saying
nothing. She was all cheered up.
"But where are we?" she suddenly cried in amazement.
"Where are we going?"
"If it's all right with you, we're going to Gertelfingen, we're
nearly there."
"Gertelfingen? What for? We'd better go back, it's getting
late."
"When do you have to be back, Bдrbele?"
"At ten. Very soon. It's been a nice walk."
"Ten o'clock is a long way off," said Knulp. "I'll see that you
get home on time. But we'll never again be so young together, so I
thought we might risk a dance. Or don't you like to dance?"
She looked at him with eager surprise. "I love to dance. But
where? Out here in the night?"
"Well be in Gertelfingen in a minute and there's music at the
Lion. We could go in for just one dance, and then we'll go home
and we'll have had a fine evening."
Bдrbele stopped still, thinking it over. "It would be fun," she
said slowly. "But what will people think of us? I don't want to be
taken for that kind of girl, and I wouldn't want anybody to think
we're going together either."
Suddenly she laughed gaily and said: "You see, if I have a
sweetheart later on, it mustn't be a tanner. I don't want to offend
you, but tanning is a dirty trade."
"Maybe you've got something there," said Knulp goodnaturedly. "I don't expect you to marry me. But nobody here
knows I'm a tanner or that you're so proud, and I've washed my
hands, so if you'd care to dance once around with me, you're
invited. If not, we'll turn back."
A pale gable belonging to the first house of the village
peered out through the black foliage. Suddenly Knulp said "Pst!"
and lifted a finger: the sound of dance music from the village, an
accordion and a fiddle.
"All right!" Bдrbele laughed and they walked faster.
At the Lion only four or five couples were dancing, all
young people unknown to Knulp. The atmosphere was quiet and
sedate and no one molested the strangers who joined in the next
dance. They danced a lдndler and a polka and then came a waltz.
Bдrbele didn't know how to waltz, so they sat down and had a
drop of beer, which was as far as Knulp's finances went.
Bдrbele was flushed from dancing, and her eyes sparkled as
she looked on.
"I suppose it's time to go," said Knulp at half past nine.
She started in surprise and looked rather sad.
"What a shame!" she said softly.
"We could stay a little longer."
"No. I've got to get back. It's been lovely."
They left the room but at the door something occurred to
Bдrbele: "We haven't given the musicians anything."
"No," said Knulp with some embarrassment. "They deserve
a tenner. The trouble is, I haven't got one."
Eagerly she drew her little knitted purse from her pocket.
"Why didn't you say anything? Here. Give it to them."
He took the coin and gave it to the musicians, then they left.
Outside, they had to wait a few minutes before they could see the
way in the deep darkness. The wind was blowing harder, driving
an occasional raindrop before it.
"Should I put up the umbrella?" Knulp asked.
"No, we'd never get ahead in this wind. It was nice in there.
You dance almost like a dancing master, tanner."
She went on chattering gaily. Her friend had fallen silent,
perhaps because he was tired, perhaps because he dreaded the
impending leave-taking.
All at once she began to sing: "I graze by the Neckar, I graze
by the Rhine." Her voice was warm and pure. At the second verse
Knulp joined in and sang the bass part with such sureness and in
such a fine deep voice that she listened happily.
"Well," he asked at the end, "is your homesickness gone?"
"Oh yes," she said, laughing brightly. "We must take
another walk soon."
"I'm sorry," he said more softly. "I'm afraid this is the last."
She stopped still. She hadn't quite heard the words, but she
had caught the note of dejection.
"But what's wrong?" she asked tremulously. "Are you put
out with me?"
"Of course not, Bдrbele. But I've got to be leaving
tomorrow. I've given notice."
"You don't mean it. Really? Oh, I am sorry to hear that."
"You mustn't be sorry about me. I wouldn't have stayed very
long in any case, and besides I'm only a tanner. You must find a
sweetheart soon, a handsome young fellow. Then you'll never be
homesick again. You'll see."
"Don't talk like that. You know I like you very much, even if
you're not my sweetheart."
They were both silent. The wind whistled round their faces.
Knulp walked more slowly. They were almost at the bridge. At
length he stopped still.
"I'll bid you goodbye now. You'd better go the rest of the
way by yourself."
With sincere affliction Bдrbele looked into his face.
"So it's true? Then let me thank you. I'll never forget this
evening. And good luck."
He clasped her hand and drew her close to him. Frightened
and surprised, she looked into his eyes. Then he took her head
with its rain-wet braids in both hands and whispered: "Goodbye,
Bдrbele. But before I go, I want a kiss from you, so you won't
forget me entirely."
She trembled and shrank back a little, but his eyes were
kindly and sad, and now for the first time she noticed how fine
they were. Gravely, without closing her own, she accepted his
kiss. Then when he stood hesitant, a faint smile on his lips, tears
welled to her eyes and she returned his kiss with warmth.
She walked away quickly and was already on the bridge
when suddenly she turned round and came back. He was still
standing on the same spot.
"What is it, Bдrbele?" he asked. "You must go home."
"Oh yes, I'm going. You mustn't think badly of me."
"Certainly not."
"But tell me, tanner. You said you had no money. Won't you
be paid before you go?"
"No, there's no pay coming to me. But that's nothing. I'll
manage. You mustn't worry."
"No, no! You've got to have something in your pocket.
Here!"
She pressed a large coin into his hand; he knew by the feel
that it was a taler.
"You can give it back to me or send it sometime."
He held her hand.
"It won't do. You mustn't throw your money around like
this. Why, it's a whole taler. Take it back. I insist. If you have
some small change, say fifty pfennigs, I'll take it gladly because
I'm hard up. But no more."
They argued a little longer, and Bдrbele had to show him
her purse, because she said she had nothing but the taler. But this
wasn't true, she also had a mark and one of the little silver twentypfennig pieces that were still current. He wanted to take that, but
she said it wasn't enough; then he said he wouldn't take anything,
but finally he kept the mark piece, and she rushed off.
On the way home she wondered why he hadn't kissed her
again, now with a sense of regret, now with the feeling that in not
kissing her again he had been really sweet and considerate. And
this was the feeling she ended up with.
It was more than an hour later when Knulp came home. He
saw that the light was still on in the big room, which meant that
the tanner's wife was sitting up waiting for him. He spat with
annoyance and thought of running off into the night that very
minute. But he was tired, it was going to rain, and he didn't want
to be unkind to the tanner. And besides he felt like playing a
harmless little joke.
He fished the key out of its hiding place, opened the house
door as stealthily as a thief, closed it behind him, locked it
soundlessly with tight-pressed lips, and carefully put the key in its
place. Then he took off his shoes and climbed the stairs in his
stocking feet. The door to the big room was ajar. He saw light
through the crack and heard the tanner's wife, who had fallen
asleep from the long wait, breathing deeply on the sofa. Then he
climbed silently to his room, locked himself in, and went to bed.
But the next day -- his mind was made up -- he would leave.
My Recollections of Knulp
In those days I was young and gay, and Knulp was still
alive. It was midsummer; the two of us were tramping through
fertile country and had few worries. By day we sauntered through
yellow grain-fields or lay in the cool shade of a walnut tree or at
the edge of the forest, and at night I listened and looked on as
Knulp told the peasants stories, put on shadow plays for the
children, or sang his songs for the girls. I listened with pleasure
and without envy; only when he was standing surrounded by
girls, his tanned face flashing like summer lightning, when for all
their laughing and joking the young things couldn't take their eyes
off him, it occasionally struck me that he was an uncommonly
lucky devil or that I myself was the opposite. And then, sick of
sitting there like a bump on a log, I sometimes crept away by
myself and dropped in on the village priest for a sensible talk and
a night's lodging, or went to the tavern for a quiet glass of wine.
One afternoon, I remember, as we were making our way
through the fields, far from the nearest village, we came to a
deserted graveyard with a little chapel beside it. Surrounded by
walls overgrown with dark shrubbery, it lay friendly and peaceful
in the hot countryside. There were two large chestnut trees at the
entrance. The gate was closed and I wanted to go on. Not so
Knulp, who started climbing over the wall.
"Stopping again?" I asked.
"I think so. I wouldn't want to get sore feet."
"But does it have to be a graveyard?"
"Never mind. Just come along. I know that peasants don't go
in much for pleasure, but when it comes to their last resting place,
they like their comfort. It's worth a bit of trouble to them, they
grow the loveliest things on their graves and all around them."
I joined him in climbing the low wall and saw that he was
right. The graves, most of them marked by white wooden crosses,
lay in straight and crooked rows, and over them grew flowers and
greenery. Bindweed and geraniums sparkled with joy, late
gillyflowers grew in the shadier spots, there were rose bushes
weighed down with roses, and a dense copse of lilac and elder.
We looked about for a while and then sat down in the grass,
which in places was tall and in flower. We rested and cooled off
and a feeling of contentment came over us.
Knulp read the name on the nearest cross and said: "His
name was Engelbert Auer, he lived to be over sixty. But now he's
lying under mignonette, which is a lovely flower, and he's at
peace. I'd be glad to have some mignonette myself when the time
comes; in the meantime, I'll take a little of this."
I said: "Better take something else; mignonette fades so
soon."
However, he broke off a sprig and put it in his hat, which
was lying beside him on the grass.
"How wonderfully quiet it is!" I said.
And he: "Yes, indeed. If it were just a little quieter, we
could hear them talking down there."
"Not them. They've finished talking."
"How do we know? They say that death is sleep; don't we
talk in our sleep now and then? Sometimes we even sing."
"Maybe you do."
"Why not? If I were dead, I'd wait until Sunday when the
girls come out here to look about and pick flowers from the
graves, and then I'd start singing, but very softly."
"What would you sing?"
"What I'd sing? Oh, any old song."
He stretched out on the ground, closed his eyes, and soon
began to sing in a soft, childlike voice:
Because I've died so young,
Come sing me, pretty maidens,
A song of farewell.
When I come back again,
When I come back again,
I'll be a pretty lad.
I couldn't help laughing, though I liked the song. He sang
beautifully, and even if the words didn't always make sense, the
tune was lovely and that was enough.
"Knulp," I said, "don't promise the pretty maidens too much,
or they'll stop listening to you. It's all very well to say you'll come
back, but no one really knows about these things, and how can
you be sure you'll be a pretty lad?"
"No, I can't be sure; that's a fact. But that's what I'd like to
be. Remember the other day, the little boy with the cow that we
asked the way of? I wish I could be like him when I come back.
Don't you?"
"No, not I. I once knew an old man, well over seventy, his
eyes were so quiet and kindly; it seemed to me that everything
about him was kindly and wise and quiet. Ever since then, I've
thought that if I came back I'd want to be like him."
"Well, you've got a long way to go. Altogether it's a funny
thing about wishes. If all I had to do this minute was to nod and
I'd be a nice little boy like that, and all you had to do was nod and
you'd be a kindly old man, neither of us would nod. We'd be quite
pleased to stay just as we are."
"Yes, that's true."
"It's true all right. But that's not all. Sometimes I say to
myself that the most beautiful thing in the world is a slender
young girl with blond hair. But that's nonsense, because often
enough we see a brunette who seems to be almost more beautiful.
And besides, there are other times when I think the most beautiful
thing of all is a bird soaring free in the sky. And another time
nothing seems so marvelous as a butterfly, a white one for
instance with red dots on its wings, or the sun shining in the
clouds at evening, when the whole world is aglow, yet the light
doesn't dazzle us, and everything looks so happy and innocent."
"Right you are, Knulp. Everything is beautiful when you
look at it in a good moment."
"Yes. But there's more to it. The most beautiful things, I
think, give us something else beside pleasure; they also leave us
with a feeling of sadness or fear."
"Why?"
"I mean that a beautiful girl wouldn't seem so beautiful if we
didn't know that she has her season and that when it's over she'll
grow old and die. If a beautiful thing were to remain beautiful for
all eternity, I'd be glad, but all the same I'd look at it with a colder
eye. I'd say to myself: You can look at it any time, it doesn't have
to be today. But when I know that something is perishable and
can't last forever, I look at it with a feeling not just of joy but of
compassion as well."
"I suppose so."
"To me there's nothing more beautiful than fireworks in the
night. There are blue and green fireballs, they rise up in the
darkness, and at the height of their beauty they double back and
they're gone. When you watch them, you're happy but at the same
time afraid, because in a moment it will all be over. The
happiness and the fear go together, and it's much more beautiful
than if it lasted longer. Don't you feel the same way?"
"Yes, I think I do. But that's not true of everything."
"Why not?"
"For instance, if a boy and girl love each other and get
married, or if two people get to be friends, it's beautiful because
it's meant to last and not to end right away."
Knulp looked at me closely; then his black lashes flickered
and he said thoughtfully: "Yes. But that comes to an end too, like
everything else. All sorts of things can wreck a friendship, or a
love for that matter."
"True, but we don't think of that until it happens."
"I don't know about that. -- For instance, I've had two loves
in my life, real ones I mean, and each time I knew it would last
forever and could end only with death, but each time it ended, and
I didn't die. I had a friend too, back home, and I thought we'd
never part. But we did part, long long ago."
He fell silent and I could think of nothing to say. I still had
no experience of the sorrow that is part and parcel of every human
relationship, nor had I learned that no matter how close two
human beings may be, there is always a gulf between them which
only love can bridge, and that only from hour to hour. I pondered
my friend's words; I liked best what he had said about the
fireballs, because I myself had often had the same feeling. The
quiet spell of the colored flame, rising into the darkness and all
too soon drowning in it, struck me as a symbol of all human
pleasure, for the more beautiful it is, the less it satisfies us and the
more quickly it is spent. I told Knulp what I had been thinking.
But he wouldn't go into it. He only said "Yes. . . yes." And
then, after a long while, in a muffled voice: "There's no sense in
all this brooding and pondering; we never do what we think. We
don't stop to reflect, we do what our hearts bid us. But maybe
there's something in what I said about friendship and love. In the
end, we all have a life of our own that we can't share with anyone
else. You can see that when a friend or loved one dies. You weep
and grieve for a day, a month, or even a year, but then the dear
departed is dead and gone, and the person in the coffin might just
as well be some homeless unknown apprentice."
"Don't say that, Knulp, I don't like it. We've often talked
about these things. We've always said that life must have a
meaning and that there is a point in being good and friendly rather
than bad and unfriendly. But the way you're talking now, nothing
makes any difference and we could just as well be thieves and
murderers."
"No, my friend, we couldn't. See if you can bring yourself to
murder the next few people we meet. Or tell a yellow butterfly
that it ought to be blue. It will laugh in your face."
"That's not what I mean. But if nothing matters, then there's
no point in trying to be good and upright. There's no goodness if
blue is as good as yellow and evil is as good as good. Then a man
is the same as an animal in the woods; he simply follows his
nature and there's neither virtue nor guilt."
Knulp sighed.
"What can I say? Maybe you're right. And that's why we get
these stupid fits of gloom, because we feel that our wanting and
trying are meaningless and that things simply go their own way.
But there's guilt even so, even when a man can't help being bad.
Because he's aware of the badness in him. And that's why
goodness must be the right way, because when we do good we're
happy and our conscience is clear."
I could see by his face that he was sick of this discussion.
That often happened with him. He started philosophizing, stated
principles, argued for and against, and then suddenly stopped. At
first I thought he had had enough of my inept answers and
objections. But it wasn't that; he felt that his leaning to
speculation carried him into territory where his knowledge and
means of expression were inadequate. For though he had read a
great deal, Tolstoy for instance, he was not always able to
distinguish between sound and unsound reasoning, and he himself
sensed as much. He spoke of learned men as a gifted child speaks
of adults; he had to admit that they were stronger and better
equipped than he, but he despised them for making no proper use
of their learning and for solving no riddles with all their wisdom.
Now he was lying on his back again with his head cradled in his
hands, peering through the black elder leaves into the hot blue sky
and softly singing an old Rhenish folk song. I still recall the last
stanza:
I've worn the red coat until now,
And now the black coat I must wear
Seven years to the day,
Till my love rots away.
Late in the afternoon we sat facing each other at the dark
edge of a copse, each with a big chunk of bread and half a hard
sausage, eating and watching the night fall. Only a short time
before, the hills had been bright with the yellow glow of the
evening sky, bathed in a fluffy luminous haze; now they were
dark and sharply outlined, painting their trees, bushes, and
meadows on the sky, which still had a little light blue in it but
much more of the dark blue of the night. While there was light
enough, we had read nonsense to each other out of Strains from
the German Hurdygurdy, a little book of idiotic songs illustrated
with small woodcuts. That had ended with the daylight. When we
had done eating, Knulp wanted music. I pulled my harmonica
from my pocket, which was full of crumbs, wiped it, and played
our usual half-dozen tunes. The darkness had spread far over the
rolling countryside, the sky had lost its pale glow and in growing
darker had shot forth one star after another. The light, thin notes
of the harmonica flew over the fields and lost themselves in the
distance.
"It's too early to sleep," I said to Knulp. "Tell me a story -- it
doesn't have to be true -- or a fairy tale."
Knulp thought back.
"All right," he said. "A story and a fairy tale, both in one.
You see, it's a dream. I had this dream last fall and twice more
since then, almost the same. Here it is:
"A narrow street in a small town like the one I come from.
All the houses had gables overlooking the street, but they were
higher than the ones you usually see. I was walking through the
street. It was as though I were coming home after a long long
time, but I wasn't really happy, because something was wrong. I
had a feeling that maybe I was in the wrong place, that this wasn't
my home town at all. Some parts of it were exactly as they should
have been and I recognized them at once, but many houses were
strange and deserted, and I couldn't find the bridge that led to the
marketplace; instead, I passed an unfamiliar garden and a church
that was like in Cologne or Basel, with two big steeples. Our
church at home had no steeple at all, but only a low stump with a
make-shift roof, because the builders had made a mistake and
hadn't been able to finish the steeple.
"It was the same with the people. I recognized some that I
saw in the distance, I knew their names, I had them on my lips
and I was all ready to call out. But most of them went into houses
or side streets and were gone. When one of them came closer, he
turned into a stranger; then when he had passed me and I looked
after him, it seemed to me that he was the man after all and that I
did know him. I saw a group of women standing outside a shop,
and one of them, I thought, was my aunt, who is dead; but when I
went up to them, I no longer recognized her, and they were
speaking a strange dialect that I could hardly understand.
"In the end I thought: Oh, if I could only be gone from here,
it's my old town and then again it isn't. But all the while I kept
seeing a familiar house or a familiar face and rushing up to it, and
every time I was disappointed. But I wasn't angry or vexed, only
sad and afraid; I wanted to say a prayer and tried hard to
remember one, but all I could think of was silly phrases -- such as
'Dear Sir' and 'Under the circumstances' -- and in my sadness and
confusion I went about mumbling these.
"This, it seemed to me, lasted a few hours, until I was
thoroughly hot and tired, and still I stumbled aimlessly from place
to place. By then it was evening and I decided to ask the next
person I met where I could lodge for the night or how to find the
road out of town, but I was unable to speak to anyone, they all
passed me by as though I weren't there. I was so tired and
desperate I thought I'd burst into tears.
"Then suddenly I turned a corner and there was our old
street. It had changed, it looked unreal and ornate, but by then that
didn't trouble me much. I walked along and distinctly recognized
house after house in spite of the dream decorations, and finally I
came to the old house where I grew up. Like the others, it was
unnaturally tall, but otherwise it looked pretty much as it had in
the old days, and I shuddered with joy and excitement.
"In the doorway stood my first love, her name was
Henriette. Except that she was taller and somehow different than
before, and still more beautiful. As I came closer, I saw that there
was something miraculous and angelic about her beauty, but I
also noticed that her hair was golden blond and not brown like
Henriette's; still, it was Henriette from top to toe, though
transfigured.
" 'Henriette!' I cried out, and took off my hat because she
looked so ethereal that I wasn't sure she'd recognize me.
"She turned and looked into my eyes. And as she looked
into my eyes, I was surprised and ashamed, because it wasn't
Henriette but Lisabeth, my second love, whom I had gone with
for years.
"So I cried 'Lisabeth!' and held out my hand.
"She looked at me; her look pierced my heart, as if God had
looked at me; it wasn't severe or proud but clear and calm, yet so
spiritual and lofty that I felt like a dog. And as she looked at me,
she became grave and sad; then she shook her head as if I had
asked an impudent question. She didn't take my hand but went
back into the house and closed the door behind her. I could hear
the lock snap.
"I turned around and went away, and though I was almost
blinded by tears and grief, I saw that the city was strangely
changed. For now every street and every house was exactly as it
had been in the old days, the evil spell was broken. The gables
were no longer so high and the colors were right, the people were
really themselves and looked at me with happy surprise as though
they knew me, and some called me by name. But I couldn't
answer and I couldn't stop to talk with them. Something drove me
across the old familiar bridge and out of the city, and my heart
was so sore that tears clouded everything I saw. I didn't know
why, but it seemed to me that I had lost everything I had in the
city and was running away in disgrace.
"Under the poplars at the edge of the town I stopped to rest.
Only then did it occur to me that I had been right outside our old
home and hadn't given a thought to my father and mother, my
brothers, sisters, and friends. Never had my heart been filled with
such turmoil, grief, and shame. But I couldn't turn back and make
amends, because the dream was over and I woke up."
Knulp said: "Every human being has his soul, he can't mix it
with any other. Two people can meet, they can talk with one
another, they can be close together. But their souls are like
flowers, each rooted to its place. One can't go to another, because
it would have to break away from its roots, and that it can't do.
Flowers send out their scent and their seeds, because they would
like to go to each other; but a flower can't do anything to make a
seed go to its right place; the wind does that, and the wind comes
and goes where it pleases."
And later: "Maybe that's what the dream I told you means. I
didn't wrong Henriette or Lisabeth knowingly. But because I once
loved them both and wanted to make them my own, they became
for me a kind of dream figure, which looks like both of them and
is neither. That figure belongs to me, but it no longer has life. And
I've often had such thoughts about my parents. They think I'm
their child and that I'm like them. But though I love them, I'm a
stranger to them, a stranger they can't understand. And to them
the main part of me, what may actually be my soul, is
unimportant; they put it down to my youth, or to caprice. And yet
they love me and would do anything in the world for me. A father
can pass on his nose and eyes and even his intelligence to his
child, but not his soul. In every human being the soul is new."
I had nothing to say to that, for at the time I hadn't begun to
think along those lines, at least I had felt no inner need to. Such
musings didn't dismay me in the least; they didn't touch my heart
and so I imagined that for Knulp as well they were more a game
than a struggle. Besides, it was so lovely and peaceful to be lying
side by side in the dry grass, waiting for night and sleep and
watching the first stars.
I said: "You're a thinker, Knulp. You ought to have been a
professor."
He laughed and shook his head. "I'd be much more likely to
join the Salvation Army one of these days," he said thoughtfully.
That was too much. "I don't believe you," I said. "Next
you'll be telling me you want to become a saint."
"So I do, so I do. Everybody who's really in earnest about
what he thinks and does is a saint. If he thinks something is right,
he's got to do it. And if one day I think it's right for me to join the
Salvation Army, I hope I'll do it."
"Why the Salvation Army?"
"I'll tell you why. I've spoken with a lot of people and
listened to a lot of speeches. I've listened to priests and
schoolteachers and mayors and Social Democrats and Liberals;
but deep in his heart not a one of them was in earnest; not a one
made me feel that if need be he'd sacrifice himself for his
wisdom. But in the Salvation Army, with all the music and
ruckus, I've seen and heard two or three fellows who were really
in earnest."
"How do you know?"
"Never mind, you can tell. I remember one who was making
a speech in a village square one Sunday. With the heat and the
dust, his voice left him. He didn't look very strong. When he
couldn't get out another word, he let his three companions sing a
verse of a hymn, and he drank a little water. Half the village were
standing around him, children and grownups, they made fun of
him and heckled him. Behind him there was a young farm hand
with a whip. From time to time he snapped it, crack! -- to plague
the speaker, and everybody laughed. But the poor fellow didn't
get angry, though he wasn't stupid; he struggled against the
hubbub with his poor weak voice and smiled where anyone else
would have wept or cursed. You know, a man doesn't do that for
starvation wages or for pleasure; no, there's got to be a great
clarity and certainty inside him."
"Possibly. But the same thing won't do for everybody. A
clever, sensitive man like you couldn't stand all that noise."
"Maybe he could. If he had something and knew something
that was better than all his cleverness and sensitiveness. I know
the same thing won't do for everybody, but the truth has to do."
"Oh, the truth! How do we know that those halleluiah
singers have the truth?"
"You've got something there. We don't know. I'm only
saying that if one day I find it's the truth, I'll follow it."
"If! But every day you find some piece of wisdom, and the
next day you give it up."
He looked at me in consternation. "That wasn't a nice thing
to say."
I wanted to apologize, but he stopped me and fell silent. In a
little while he softly said good night and stretched out, but I don't
think he fell asleep right away. I was wide awake myself and lay
there for over an hour propped up on my elbows, peering into the
night.
In the morning I saw right away that this was one of Knulp's
good days. I told him so. He beamed at me out of his childlike
eyes and said: "You've guessed right. And do you know where a
good day like this comes from?"
"No. Where?"
"From sleeping well and dreaming of beautiful things. But
you mustn't remember what they were. That's how it is with me
today. I've dreamed magnificent, joyful things, but I've forgotten
them all; I only know it was wonderful."
Even before we came to the next village and had our
morning milk under our belts, he sang four brand-new songs into
the sober morning in his warm, light, effortless voice. Written out
and printed, these songs might not amount to much. Knulp was
not a great poet, but a poet he was, and while he was singing
them, his little songs often bore a close family resemblance to the
finest songs in the world. Certain passages and lines that I
remember are really beautiful and I still cherish them. They were
never written down; his verses were born, lived, and died like the
breezes, in irresponsible innocence, but they gave beauty and
warmth to many a moment, not only for himself and me but for
many others as well.
That morning he sang the praises of the sun, as he did in
nearly all his songs.
Like a maiden from her door,
Bright and clad in Sunday best,
Blushing and yet proudly, she
Steps up from the mountain crest.
His conversation was often heavy with philosophy, but his
songs had the lightness of children playing in their summer
clothes. Some of them were nothing but whimsical nonsense, a
mere outlet for his high spirits.
That day I was infected by his mood. We called out
greetings to all the people we met and teased them, sometimes
leaving laughter behind us and sometimes abuse, and our whole
day passed like a holiday. We told each other jokes from our
schooldays and recalled schoolboy pranks, we made up
nicknames for the peasants who passed and sometimes for their
horses and oxen, we stopped by a garden fence that could not be
seen from the road and stuffed ourselves full of gooseberries, and
we economized on energy and shoe leather by taking a rest every
hour or so.
It seemed to me that never in the course of our brief
friendship had I seen Knulp so merry and bright and entertaining.
This, I thought to my delight, was the true beginning of our happy
vagrant life together.
By midday the heat grew oppressive and we spent more
time lying in the grass than walking. Late in the afternoon, storm
clouds gathered, the air was still and sultry, and we decided to
seek shelter for the night.
Knulp became less talkative; he was a little tired, but I
hardly noticed it, for he continued to laugh heartily when I
laughed and to sing when I sang. I myself became more exuberant
than ever, as though fireworks were flaring up inside me. It may
have been the exact opposite with Knulp; perhaps his holiday
lights had begun to die down. I was always like that at the time.
On a good day, I grew more and more lively toward nightfall; if I
had been enjoying myself, I couldn't stop; many a time I roamed
about for hours all by myself, long after the others had gone
wearily to sleep.
My afternoon exuberance took hold of me that day.
Descending the valley, we came to a good-sized village and I
looked forward to a riotous night. First we selected our night
lodging, an easily accessible barn off to one side, then we went
into the village and sat down in the garden of an inn, for I had
asked my friend to be my guest that evening. Since it was a day of
rejoicing, I thought we'd have pancakes and a few bottles of beer.
Knulp had accepted the invitation gladly. But when we were
seated at a table under a magnificent plane tree, he said with some
embarrassment: "No drinking bout, eh? I'll be glad to drink a
bottle of beer, it will do me good and I'll enjoy it, but that's about
all I can take."
I didn't argue. I thought: We'll have as much or as little as
we please. We ate the hot pancakes with good fresh rye bread. I
have to admit I ordered a second bottle of beer while Knulp's first
bottle was still half full. I was overjoyed to be at such a nice inn
again, sitting so grandly and comfortably, and I was in no hurry to
leave.
When Knulp had finished his bottle of beer, I offered him
another but he declined; instead, he suggested that we take a little
walk around the village and go to bed early. This wasn't at all
what I had in mind. I couldn't tell him so directly, but since my
bottle wasn't empty yet, I raised no objection to his leaving ahead
of me; we'd find each other later on.
And leave he did. I watched him as he descended the two or
three steps and with his easy, carefree holiday gait made his way
down the broad street leading to the center of the village. He had
a starflower behind his ear. I was sorry he hadn't wanted to join
me in another bottle of beer, but as I looked after him I thought
affectionately: What a fine fellow!
Meanwhile, the sun had disappeared, the heat became more
oppressive. In such weather I enjoyed sitting quietly over a cool
drink. I settled myself comfortably at my table and prepared to
stay awhile. Since I was just about the only guest, the waitress
had plenty of time to chat with me. I ordered two cigars. One of
them was originally intended for Knulp, but after a while I forgot
that and smoked it myself.
About an hour later Knulp came back and tried to take me
away. But I had grown roots. He said he was tired, and we agreed
that he should go to our sleeping place and lie down. And he left
me. No sooner had he gone than the waitress began to question
me about him; the girls always took a shine to him. I didn't mind,
he was my friend and she wasn't my sweetheart. I sang his
praises, for I was feeling fine and I loved the whole world.
It was beginning to thunder and the wind was whistling
softly in the plane tree when finally, very late, I prepared to leave.
I paid, gave the girl a tenner, and started off without haste. I had
gone some time without drinking, and now I felt that I'd had a
bottle too many. But I could hold my drink and my bit of tipsiness
only made me gay. I sang as I went, and after a while I found our
sleeping quarters. I went in quietly. As I expected, I found Knulp
asleep. He had spread out his brown jacket and lay on it in his
shirtsleeves. His forehead, his bare neck, and one outstretched
hand shone pale in the half darkness.
Then I lay down fully dressed, but my excitement and the
merry-go-round in my head kept waking me, and there was light
in the sky when I finally fell into a deep dull sleep -- deep but not
peaceful. I felt heavy and sluggish and had muddled, tormenting
dreams.
I awoke late; it was already broad daylight and the
brightness hurt my eyes. My head was empty and beclouded and
my bones ached. I yawned and yawned, rubbed my eyes, and
stretched so hard that my joints cracked. But for all my weariness
I still retained a vestige and echo of yesterday's bright humor and
I felt sure I could wash away my aches and pains at the nearest
well.
I was wrong. When I looked around, Knulp wasn't there. I
called out to him and whistled, suspecting nothing at first. But
when my calling, whistling, and searching proved vain, it
suddenly came to me that he had left me. Yes, he was gone, he
had crept away without a word, he hadn't wanted to stay with me
any longer. Maybe my drinking had disgusted him, maybe he had
been ashamed of his own exuberance the day before. Or possibly
a sudden whim had come over him, or he was tired of my
company, or he simply felt the need to be alone. But more than
likely, my drinking had been to blame.
The joy went out of me, I was overcome with shame and
grief. Where was my friend now? In spite of his speeches, I had
prided myself on understanding his soul a little and on holding
some share in it. And now he was gone, I was disappointed and
alone. I found more fault with myself than with him. Now it was
my turn to taste the loneliness which in Knulp's opinion was the
lot of every man and which I had never really believed in. It was
bitter, and not only on that first day. Since then, of course, it has
been alleviated now and then, but it has never left me entirely.
The End
It was a bright day in October. Short, fitful gusts of wind
stirred the light, sun-warmed air. The pale-blue smoke of brush
fires rose in thin hesitant ribbons from fields and gardens, filling
the luminous countryside with the sweet pungent smell of burning
green wood and weeds. The village gardens were abloom with
full-colored asters, pale late roses and dahlias; here and there
along the fences a flaming nasturtium still glowed amid the pale
withered shrubbery.
Dr. Machold's fly drove slowly along the gently rising road
to Bulach. The grainfields on the left had already been mowed,
but the potatoes were still being harvested; on the right there was
a narrow strip of young pines, a brown wall of serried trunks and
withered branches; the ground was of the same dry brown color,
carpeted with parched pine needles. The road led straight into the
tender-blue autumn sky, as though the world ended at the top of
the rise.
The doctor held the reins loosely, letting his old nag go
where he pleased. He had just left the deathbed of a woman who,
though beyond help, had struggled obstinately for her life to the
last. Now he was tired and the quiet ride through the friendly
country lulled him. His thoughts had fallen asleep; absently
following the cries that mingled with the smell of the brush fires,
he was led to pleasant blurred memories of autumn holidays from
school, and further back to the sounds and shapeless half-light of
infancy. For he had grown up in the country, and his senses
responded knowingly and gladly to the signs of the season and its
occupations.
He had almost fallen asleep when his carriage stopped,
jolting him awake. A rivulet running across the road held the front
wheels in place; gratefully the horse had stopped and was waiting
with lowered head, enjoying the rest.
Aroused by the sudden silence, Machold took a firm hold on
the reins, smiled to see the woods and the sky sunny and clear
after his few minutes of twilight, and with a friendly click of his
tongue started the horse off again. Then he pulled himself up
straight -- he didn't approve of dozing in the daytime -- and lit a
cigar. The nag went on at a slow walk; two women in broadbrimmed hats called greetings from behind a long row of filled
potato sacks.
By now the top of the slope was near; the horse raised his
head in expectation, looking forward to the long downhill trot
home. Just then a man appeared on the bright nearby horizon, a
wayfarer. For a moment he stood tall and free against the
glittering blue; then, descending the slope, he became gray and
small. He came closer,, a thin man with a small beard, poorly
dressed, obviously at home on the road. His gait was weary and
painful, but he lifted his hat graciously and said Grьss Gott.
"Grьss Gott," said Dr. Machold, and looked after the
stranger when he had passed. Then suddenly he stopped his horse.
Rising to his feet and turning back over the creaking carriage top,
he called out: "Hey! Come here a minute!"
The dusty wayfarer stopped and looked back. He smiled
faintly, turned away and seemed about to go on, then he changed
his mind and complied.
Now he was standing hat in hand beside the fly.
"May I ask where you're going?" said Machold.
"Straight ahead -- to Berchtoldsegg."
"Don't we know each other? It's only the name that escapes
me. You know me, don't you?"
"I'd say you were Dr. Machold."
"What did I tell you? But what's your name?"
"You must know me, doctor. We were in Plocher's class
together; you used to copy my Latin exercises."
Machold jumped out and looked the man in the eye. Then he
laughed and slapped him on the back.
"That's it!" he said. "You're the famous Knulp, and we were
classmates. Let me shake your hand, old friend! It must be ten
years since we last met. Still on the road?"
"Still on the road. A man gets set in his ways as he gets
older."
"That's true. But where are you heading? Back home
again?"
"That's right. I'm going to Gerbersau, I've a little something
to attend to."
"I see. Any of your people still living?"
"No, there's nobody left."
"You don't look exactly young any more, Knulp. We're only
in our forties, you and I. And you wanting to pass me by like that,
that wasn't nice of you. -- You know, I think you might need a
doctor."
"There's nothing much wrong with me, and what there is, no
doctor can cure."
"We'll see about that. Just hop in and come along. We can
talk better that way."
Knulp stepped back a little and put his hat on. With a look
of embarrassment, he resisted when the doctor tried to help him
into the carriage.
"What for?" he said. "Your horse won't run away while
we're standing here."
But then a fit of coughing came over him and the doctor,
who by then knew what was what, grabbed hold of him without
further ado and boosted him into the fly.
"There," he said, driving on. "We'll be at the top in a minute.
From then on it's a trot and we'll be home in half an hour. You
don't have to say anything now with your cough, we can talk
when we get home. -- What? -- No, none of that! The place for
sick people is bed, not the road. You helped me often enough in
Latin class, now it's my turn."
They drove over the crest and the brake whistled as they
descended the long incline; down below, one could already see
the roofs of Bulach over the fruit trees. Machold held the reins
short and kept his eyes on the road, while Knulp surrendered half
contentedly to the pleasure of driving and to his friend's
dictatorial hospitality. Tomorrow, he thought, or at worst the day
after, I'll trundle along to Gerbersau if my bones still hold
together. He wasn't a young whippersnapper any more who can
afford to squander his days and years. He was a sick old man, and
his last remaining wish was to see his home town again before the
end.
In Bulach his friend took him into the big room and gave
him milk and bread and ham. They chatted together and slowly
recaptured their old intimacy. Only then did the doctor begin his
examination, which the patient tolerated good-naturedly, with a
touch of mockery.
"Tell me," said Machold when he had finished, "do you
know what you've got?" He said it lightly, without solemnity, and
Knulp was grateful to him for that.
"Yes, Machold, I know. It's consumption, and I know I can't
last long."
"Oh, you never can tell. You've just got to get it through
your head that you need a bed and care. For the present you can
stay here with me; later on I'll find you a place in the nearest
hospital. You've got crazy ideas, my boy; you'll have to get some
sense into you if you want to pull through."
Knulp put his jacket on and turned to the doctor with a
roguish look on his haggard gray face. "Machold," he said goodnaturedly, "you're going to a lot of trouble on my account. It's
kind of you. But it's too late. You mustn't expect too much of
me."
"That remains to be seen. Right now you're going to sit in
the sun, as long as it's shining in the garden. Lina will make up
the bed in the guest room. We've got to keep an eye on you,
Knulp. When a man who's spent his whole life in the sun and
fresh air gets lung trouble, of all things, there must be something
wrong."
With that he left his friend.
Lina, the housekeeper, wasn't pleased; the idea of letting a
common tramp into the guest room! But the doctor cut her off
short.
"That'll do, Lina. The man hasn't long to live, let's just make
him comfortable for a little while. He's always been clean, and
we'll see that he takes a bath before he goes to bed. Lay one of my
night shirts out for him, and maybe you could give him my winter
slippers. And don't forget that he's a friend of mine."
Knulp had slept eleven hours and dozed away the foggy
morning. It was some time before he remembered where he was.
When the sun came out, Machold had let him get up, and now,
after lunch, they were sitting on the sunny terrace over a glass of
red wine. The good meal and his half glass of wine had made
Knulp lively and talkative. The doctor was taking an hour off
from his work, to chat with his strange old friend and perhaps
learn a thing or two about his extraordinary life.
"So all in all," he said with a smile, "you're satisfied with the
life you've led. That makes it all right. Otherwise I'd be tempted
to say that you might have made more of yourself. You wouldn't
have had to become a pastor or a schoolteacher, you could have
been a naturalist or a poet. I don't know to what extent you've
developed your talents or made use of them, but if you have made
any use of them it's been entirely for your own benefit. Or am I
wrong?"
Propping his chin with its sparse little beard in the hollow of
his hand, Knulp watched the red reflections playing over the sunbright tablecloth behind his wine glass.
"That's not quite true," he said slowly. "My talents, as you
call them, don't amount to much. I'm a pretty good whistler, I can
play the accordion, and I make up a little poem now and then; I
used to be a good runner and I wasn't a bad dancer. That's the sum
of my talents. But I didn't enjoy them alone. Almost always there
were friends about, or young girls or children. My little gifts gave
them pleasure and sometimes they were thankful to me. Why ask
for more? Can't we content ourselves with that?"
"Yes," said the doctor. "Indeed we can. But I've got one
more thing to ask you. You attended Latin school up to the fifth
class, I remember that distinctly, and you were a good student,
though not exactly a paragon. And then one fine day you were
gone. I heard you were at public school and that was the end of
our friendship. In those days a Latin student simply didn't have a
friend in public school. How did it come about? Later on,
whenever someone mentioned you, I thought: If he'd stayed with
us in Latin school, his whole life would have been different. So
tell me: what happened? Were you sick of it? Couldn't your old
man keep up the tuition? Or was it something else?"
The sick man clasped his glass in his brown, emaciated hand
and raised it, but he did not drink. He peered through the wine at
the green garden light and carefully set the glass down again.
Then he closed his eyes in silence and lost himself in thought.
"Do you mind talking about it?" his friend asked. "There's
no need to."
Knulp opened his eyes and gave Machold a long, searching
look.
"No," he said, still hesitantly, "I believe there is a need. You
see, I've never spoken of those things to anybody. But now maybe
someone ought to know. It's only a child's story, but to me it was
important, it's plagued me for years. Strange you should bring it
up!"
"Why?"
"Because it's been on my mind lately, and that's why I'm on
my way to Gerbersau."
"In that case, tell me about it."
"Do you remember, Machold? We were good friends then,
anyway up to the third or fourth class. After that we saw less of
each other. Quite a few times you whistled outside our house and
I didn't answer."
"By God, that's right! I hadn't given it a thought for more
than twenty years. What a memory you have! Go on."
"Now I can tell you what happened. Girls were to blame. I
grew curious about them rather early. At a time when you still
believed in the stork and the babywell, I had a pretty fair idea
what boys and girls do together. I couldn't think of anything else,
and that's why I stopped playing Indians with you and my other
friends."
"But you were only twelve!"
"Almost thirteen. I'm a year older than you. Once when I
was sick in bed, a girl cousin came to stay with us. She was three
or four years older than I, and she began to play around with me.
When I was well again, I went to her room one night. I found out
what a woman looks like, I was scared out of my wits and I ran
away. After that I wouldn't speak to my cousin, I was disgusted
and afraid of her. But she'd given me the idea and all I did after
that was to chase after girls. Haasis the tanner had two daughters
my age, and there were other girls from the neighborhood. We
played hide-and-seek in the dark attics, and we giggled and
tickled and did things in secret. Most of the time I was the only
boy; now and then one of the girls let me braid her hair or gave
me a kiss. We were all children, we didn't really know what was
what, but it was all very loving, and when the girls went
swimming I hid in the bushes and watched them. -- Then one day
a new girl turned up, she lived in the outskirts, her father worked
in the knitting mill. Her name was Franziska and I liked her from
the first."
The doctor interrupted him. "What was her father's name?
Maybe I know her."
"I'm sorry, Machold, I'd rather not tell you. It has nothing to
do with the story and I wouldn't want anyone to know this about
her. -- Well anyway, she was bigger and stronger than I.
Sometimes we tumbled and wrestled together. When she
squeezed me till it hurt, it made me feel dizzy and half drunk. I
fell in love with her. She was two years older than I. She kept
saying she meant to have a sweetheart soon and the only thing I
wanted in all the world was for her sweetheart to be me. -- One
day she was sitting all by herself in the tanner's garden down by
the river. Her feet were dangling in the water, she'd been bathing
and all she had on was her shift. I went and sat down beside her.
Suddenly I plucked up my courage and told her I wanted to be her
sweetheart. But she gave me a pitying look out of her brown eyes
and said: 'You're only a little boy in short pants. What do you
know about loving?' I told her I knew all about it and if she
wouldn't be my sweetheart I'd throw her in the river and myself
with her. That roused her interest. She gave me a woman's look
and said: 'Let's give it a try. Do you know how to kiss?' Yes, I
said, and gave her a quick kiss on the lips. I thought that was all
there was to it, but she grabbed my head and held it tight and
kissed me for real like a woman till I couldn't see straight. 'You'd
suit me all right, sonny. But it can't be done. I can't have a
sweetheart that goes to Latin school. They don't turn out real men.
I need a real man for my sweetheart, a mechanic or a workman;
not a scholar. So it's not possible.' But she'd pulled me up on her
lap, she was so firm and warm and good to hold in my arms that I
couldn't dream of giving her up. So I promised Franziska that I'd
leave Latin school and become a mechanic. She only laughed, but
I wouldn't give in, and in the end she kissed me again and
promised that once I'd left Latin school she'd be my sweetheart
and I'd be very well off with her."
Knulp stopped, seized with a fit of coughing. His friend
looked at him attentively, and for a time they were both silent.
Then Knulp went on: "Well, now you know the story. Of course it
didn't work out as quickly as I expected. My father boxed my ears
when I told him I didn't want to go to Latin school any more. At
first I didn't know what to do; more than once I thought of setting
fire to our school. That was childish nonsense, but I was serious
about my main idea. Finally I thought of a way out. I simply
stopped being a good student. Don't you remember?"
"Yes, it comes back to me now. For a while you were kept
in almost every day."
"That's right. I cut classes, I gave wrong answers, I didn't do
my homework, I lost my copybooks. Every day I did something
wrong, and in the end I began to enjoy it. I certainly gave the
teachers a bad time. By then I'd really lost interest in Latin and all
that. I've always been impulsive, you know. When I had some
new enthusiasm, everything else in the world eased to exist.
That's how it had been with gymnastics, then with trout fishing,
and then with botany. And now it was the same way with girls.
Until I'd sown my wild oats and had my experience, nothing else
mattered. And it is pretty painful to sit in a schoolroom reciting
conjugations when all you can really think about is what you saw
the other day when the girls were bathing and you were spying on
them. -- Well, there you have it. The teachers may have guessed
what was going on, they liked me and shut their eyes as long as
possible. My plan would still have failed if I hadn't taken up with
Franziska's brother. He was in the last class of public school, and
he was no good; I learned a lot from him, and everything I learned
was bad. In a few months I finally got what I wanted. My father
gave me the licking of my life, but I'd been expelled from Latin
school and I was in Franziska's brother's class."
"And the girl?" Machold asked. "What about her?"
"That was the worst of it. She never did get to be my
sweetheart. When her brother started bringing me to their house,
she stopped being so nice to me; she treated me as if I'd gone
down in the world. After a couple of months at public school I got
into the habit of sneaking out after dark. It was then that I
discovered the truth. One night I was roaming around in the park.
There were two lovers sitting on a bench and I stood there, as I
did now and then, spying and listening. When I crept closer, I saw
it was Franziska and a young mechanic. They took no notice of
me, he had his arm around her neck and was holding a cigarette;
her blouse was unbuttoned and, well, it was horrible. All my
trouble had been for nothing."
Machold patted his friend on the back. "Hm. Maybe you
were better off."
But Knulp shook his angular head strenuously.
"No, certainly not. I'd still give my right hand for it to have
turned out differently. Don't say a word against Franziska, she
wasn't to blame. If it had come out right, my first experience of
love would have been a beautiful and happy one. Maybe that
would have helped me to get used to public school and straighten
things out with my father. Because, you see -- what can I say? --
since then I've had good friends and casual friends, and even girl
friends; but I've never relied on anyone's word and I've never
given my own. Never again. I've lived my life as I saw fit, I've
had my share of freedom and good things, but I've always been
alone."
He picked up his glass, carefully drained the last few drops
of wine, and stood up.
"If you don't mind, I think I'll lie down again. I don't want to
talk about it any more. And you must have things to do."
The doctor nodded. "Just one word. I'm going to write a
letter now -- to see if I can get you into a hospital. The idea may
not appeal to you, but there's no other way. You're done for unless
you get proper care very soon."
"What difference does it make?" cried Knulp with
unaccustonied violence. "I'm done for in any case. Nothing can
help now, you know that yourself. Why should I let myself be
shut up?"
"Don't say that, Knulp. Be reasonable. What kind of a doctor
would I be if I let you run around loose in your condition? We'll
get you a bed in Oberstetten; I'll give you a letter. And next week
I'll come and see how you're doing. That's a promise."
The tramp sank back into his chair; he seemed on the verge
of tears and rubbed his hands as though they were cold. Then he
turned to the doctor with a look of childlike supplication.
"Well," he said very softly. "If that's how it is, I've a great
favor to ask of you. Don't be angry. It's not nice of me, you've
done so much, you've even given me red wine. You've been too
good. I don't deserve it. But. . ."
Machold tapped him reassuringly on the shoulder. "Don't be
silly, old friend. Nobody's trying to force you. Out with it!"
"You won't be angry?"
"Of course not. Why should I be?"
"Then, Machold, I beg of you. It's a big favor. Don't send
me to Oberstetten. If I must go to a hospital, I'd like it to be in
Gerbersau. There people know me, I'll be at home. It's probably
better for the poor relief too, I was born there, and besides. . ."
His eyes begged fervently, he was so agitated he could
hardly speak.
He's feverish, Machold thought. And he said calmly: "If
that's all you want, it's settled. Good idea! I'll write to Gerbersau.
And now go and lie down, you've been talking too much."
He looked after the tramp as he shuffled into the house, and
suddenly he remembered the summer when Knulp had taught him
how to fish for trout. He thought of the handsome, passionate
twelve-year-old boy and of his knowing, masterful manner
toward his friends.
The next morning was foggy and Knulp spent the whole day
in bed. The doctor brought him a few books but he scarcely
touched them. He was listless and dejected, for now that he was
living in comfort, with fine food and a soft bed, he felt more
plainly than ever that the end was in sight.
If I lie here another few days, he thought, I'll never get up
again. He no longer cared much about life, in the last few years
the road had lost much of its charm for him. But he didn't want to
die until he had seen Gerbersau again and taken his secret leave of
so many things, of the river and the bridge, the marketplace and
his father's old garden, and of Franziska as well. His later loves
were forgotten, just as his long years of wandering had dwindled
in his memory and lost their importance for him, while the
mysterious days of his boyhood took on a new radiance and
magic.
He examined the guest room closely; he had not lived so
splendidly for years. With a knowing eye and sensitive fingers he
studied the weave of the bed sheets, the soft, natural-wool
blanket, the fine pillow slips. The hardwood floor interested him
too, and on the wall the photograph of the Doges' palace, framed
in glass mosaic.
Then he lay for a long while with open unseeing eyes, too
tired to concern himself with anything but what was going on in
his sick body. But suddenly he started up, leaned out of bed, and
with hurried fingers picked up his boots, which he examined with
expert care. They were in bad shape, but it was already October,
they'd last until the first snow. Then everything would be over. It
occurred to him that he might ask Machold for a pair of old shoes.
No, that would arouse his suspicions; you don't need shoes in the
hospital. He ran his fingers over the cracks in the uppers. If he
rubbed them well with fat, they'd surely last another month. No
need to worry. His old shoes would outlive him and still be giving
good service when he himself had vanished from the roads.
He dropped the boots and tried to breathe deeply, but it hurt
him and made him cough. Then he lay still and waited, taking
short breaths, tortured by fear of giving out before he had satisfied
his last wish.
He tried to think of death as he had done now and then, but
that tired him and he dozed off. When he awoke an hour later, he
felt fresh and calm as though he had slept for days. He thought of
Machold and felt that he would like to leave him some token of
his gratitude when he went away. He decided to write down one
of his poems; the doctor had asked about them only the day
before. But he couldn't remember any, or he didn't care for what
he remembered. Looking out the window, he saw the fog in the
woods nearby and stared into it until a thought came to him. From
the drawer of his bedside table he removed the clean white paper
with which it was lined, and wrote with a pencil stub he had
picked up around the house.
The flowers must wither
When the fog comes,
And people must die
And go down to their graves.
People are flowers,
They too will come back
In the springtime.
And then they will never be sick again,
And all will he forgiven.
He stopped and read what he had written. It wasn't a real
song, there were no rhymes, but everything he wanted to say was
in it. He moistened the pencil with his tongue and wrote under it:
'To Doctor Machold, from his grateful friend K."
Then he put the paper into the little drawer.
Next day the fog was still thicker, but the air was cold and
brisk, it seemed likely that the sun would be out by noon.
Machold came and informed him that a bed was available at the
Gerbersau hospital and that he was expected. Then when Knulp
had pleaded with him, the doctor let him get up.
"I'll hike over right after lunch," said Knulp. "It will take me
four hours, maybe five."
"That's all you need!" Machold laughed. "No hiking for the
present. If we don't find anything else, I'll drive you over in my
carriage. I'll ask the mayor, he may be taking a load of fruit or
potatoes to town. One day more or less won't matter."
The guest gave in. The mayor sent word that his hired man
would be driving two calves to Gerbersau the next day, and it was
decided that Knulp would ride along with him.
"But you could use a warmer coat," said Machold. "Could
you wear one of mine, or would it be too big?"
Knulp had no objection, the coat was tried on and found
satisfactory. But since the goods were of the best and the coat was
in excellent condition, Knulp with his old childlike vanity decided
at once to move the buttons. The doctor looked on with
amusement and gave him a shirt collar to complete the picture.
That afternoon Knulp, in great secrecy, looked himself over
in his new clothes. He cut such a fine figure that he regretted not
having shaved recently. He didn't dare ask the housekeeper for the
doctor's razor, but he knew the village blacksmith and went out to
see what could be done in that quarter.
He soon found the smithy and went in, proffering the old
journeyman's greeting: "A blacksmith from foreign parts requests
employment."
The blacksmith studied him with a cold eye. "You're no
blacksmith," he said. "You can't fool me."
"True enough!" Knulp laughed. "You've still got your
eyesight. Funny you don't recognize me. Remember? I used to be
a musician. Many a time you danced to my accordion on Saturday
nights in Haierbach."
The blacksmith knitted his brows and went on filing for a
few minutes. Then he led Knulp to the light and examined him.
"I've got it," he said with a short laugh. "You're Knulp.
People get older when you haven't seen them in so long. What are
you doing in Bulach? I can spare a tenner and a glass of cider."
"That's very kind of you, blacksmith, I appreciate it. But it's
something else I want. Would you lend me your razor for a few
minutes? I'm going dancing tonight."
The blacksmith threatened him with his forefinger.
"You old faker! The way you look, it seems to me, you can't
be very keen on dancing."
Knulp tittered gaily.
"You notice everything. You should have been a magistrate.
Well, yes, I'm going to the hospital tomorrow, Machold is sending
me. Naturally I can't turn up with this mattress on my face. Give
me your razor, you'll have it back in half an hour."
"Hm. Where are you going with it?"
"Over to the doctor's, I'm staying there. Can I have it?"
Knulp's story didn't sound quite credible. The blacksmith
had his suspicions.
"You can have it. But it's no ordinary razor, you know, it's
hollow-ground, genuine Solingen. I want to see it back."
"You will."
"Of course. -- Say, that's a nice coat you've got on. You
won't need it to shave in. I'll tell you what: take it off and leave it
with me. When you come back with the razor, I'll give you your
coat."
Knulp made a wry face. "All right. You're not exactly a
prince. But it's a deal."
The blacksmith produced his razor, Knulp left his coat as a
pledge, but he wouldn't let the grimy blacksmith touch it. Half an
hour later he returned the Solingen razor, his unkempt beard was
gone, and he looked very different.
"Now all you need is a flower behind your ear and you'll be
ready to go courting," said the blacksmith admiringly.
But Knulp was no longer in a joking mood, he put his coat
on, said a curt thank you, and left the smithy.
On the way home he met the doctor, who stopped him.
"Where have you been?" he asked in consternation. "And
the looks of you! -- Ah, you've shaved! What an overgrown baby
you are!"
But he was pleased, and that evening Knulp had red wine
again. The two schoolfriends celebrated their parting, both putting
on a show of good cheer and repressing any sign of dejection.
Early in the morning the mayor's hired man drove up with
the wagon. Two calves with quaking knees stood there in wooden
cages, staring wide-eyed into the cold morning. The first frost lay
over the meadows. Knulp was helped into the front seat beside the
hired man and a blanket spread over his knees. The doctor pressed
Knulp's hand and gave the hired man half a mark. As the wagon
clanked away in the direction of the woods, the hired man lit his
pipe and Knulp blinked sleepily into the cool, bright-blue
morning.
Later on the sun came out and by noon it was pleasantly
warm. The two of them in the front seat got along splendidly.
When they reached Gerbersau, the hired man was determined to
go out of his way and take Knulp to the hospital. But Knulp soon
dissuaded him and they parted good friends on the edge of the
town. Knulp stood by the roadside and looked after the wagon
until it disappeared under the maple trees by the cattle market.
Then smiling he turned into a path, known only to natives,
that wound its way between garden hedges. He was free again. In
the hospital they could wait.
Once again the homecomer savored the light and air, the
sounds and smells of his native town, and the exciting, appeasing
feeling of being at home: the crush of peasants and townspeople
at the cattle market, the sun-drenched shadows of brown chestnut
trees, the dark autumn butterflies in funereal flight by the city
wall, the sound of the market fountain with its four streams of
water, the smell of wine and the hollow wooden hammering that
issued from the cooper's vaulted doorway, the familiar street
names, each one shrouded in a dense and restless swarm of
memories. With his whole being the wanderer drank in the
enchantment of home, of recognition, of memory, of comradeship
with every street corner and every curbstone. All afternoon he
roamed tirelessly from street to street, he listened to the knife
grinders by the river, watched the turner through the windows of
his workshop, read old familiar names on freshly painted signs.
He dipped his hand into the market fountain, but to quench his
thirst he waited till he had come to the little Abbot's Spring,
which still gushed mysteriously, as in years gone by, from the
lower story of an old old house and gurgled between the stone
flags in the strangely clear half light of its springhouse. He stood
for a long while by the river, leaning on the wooden rail and
looking down at the dark, long-haired water weeds and the slim
black fishes that hovered motionless over the floor of trembling
pebbles. He stepped out on the old footbridge and when he came
to the middle flexed his knees as he had done as a boy, in order to
feel the gentle, elastic counterthrust of the wooden structure.
Without haste he went on, forgetting nothing, neither the
linden tree and the small grass plot by the church nor the upper
millpond, which had once been his favorite bathing place. He
stopped outside the little house where his father had lived long
ago, and for a time leaned his back gently against the old door. He
went to the garden and looked over a loveless new wire fence into
a newly laid-out vegetable patch -- but the weathered stone steps
and the squat round quince trees were still the same. Here, before
his expulsion from Latin school, Knulp had lived the happiest
days of his life; here he had known complete happiness and
fulfillment, joys without bitterness, the sweetness of stolen
cherries, the delight of tending his little garden and watching his
flowers grow, the lovely gillyflowers, the merry bindweed, the
tender velvet pansies. And the rabbit hutches and the workshop
where he had built kites and made water pipes from hollow elder
branches and mill wheels out of balls of string with pieces of
shingle for paddles. He had known the cats on every one of these
roofs, sampled the fruit in every garden roundabout, climbed
every tree, and made himself green dream nests in their crowns.
This bit of world belonged to him, he had known every inch of it
and loved it; every bush and every slope had held meaning for
him, had had its tales to tell; every rain or snowfall had spoken to
him; the air and earth had lived in response to his dreams and
desires. And even today, it seemed to Knulp, this world belonged
to him as much as to any of the owners of these houses and
gardens. Which of them could claim to prize it more highly or to
find more memories in it?
Between the nearby roofs he could see a tall, sharp gable. In
that narrow house Haasis the tanner had lived, and there Knulp's
first tender whisperings with girls had put an end to the games
and joys of his childhood. Many an evening, as he left that house
and made his way home down the darkening street, intimations of
love had stirred within him; it was there that he had undone the
tanner's daughter's braids, and there that he had reeled under the
fair Franziska's kisses. He would take a look around over there
later in the evening, or perhaps next day. But now these
recollections held little attraction for him, he would gladly have
exchanged them all for the memory of a single hour of the time
that had gone before -- of his childhood.
For an hour or more he stood by the garden fence, looking
in, and what he saw was not the new, strange garden which
already looked very bare and autumnal with its young berry
bushes. He saw his father's garden and his own little flower bed,
the bears'-ears he had planted on Easter Sunday and the glassy
balsamines, and little mounds of pebbles where he deposited the
lizards that he caught over and over again, inconsolable that none
would stay and become his pet, but always eager and full of hope
when he had captured a new one. Today he would have given all
the houses and gardens, all the flowers and lizards and birds in the
world for a single one of the summer flowers that had put forth
their precious petals -- ever so slowly -- in his little garden. And
the old currant bushes, each one of which he remembered exactly.
They were gone, they had not been eternal and indestructible,
someone had dug them up and made a fire; wood and roots and
withered leaves had burned all together, and no one had mourned
for them.
Machold had often come to see him here. Now he was a
doctor and a gentleman and drove around in a fly visiting sick
people. Yes, he was still a good and upright man; but he too, even
this sturdy, intelligent fellow: what was he compared to the
candid, shy, eagerly affectionate boy he had been then? Here
Knulp had shown him how to build cages for flies and towers of
shingles for grasshoppers; he had been Machold's teacher and his
older, cleverer, admired friend.
The neighbor's lilac tree had grown old; it was withered and
covered with moss. The latticework garden house was a ruin. And
whatever they built in its place could never be as beautiful and
pleasant and right as it had been.
Night was falling and it was growing cold when Knulp left
the overgrown garden path. From the new church steeple, which
changed the face of the city, a new bell rang loud.
He crept through the gate of the tannery; it was after
working hours and there was no one to be seen in the yard.
Soundlessly he passed over the soft tanning floor, between the
gaping pits where hides were steeping in caustic, and stopped at
the low wall, beyond which the darkening river flowed between
mossy-green rocks. That was where he had sat with Franziska late
one afternoon, their bare feet splashing in the water.
If she hadn't made me wait in vain, thought Knulp,
everything would have turned out differently. Even without Latin
school and the university, I'd have had the strength and the will to
make something of myself. How clear and simple life was! He
had thrown himself away, he had lost interest in everything, and
life, falling in with his feelings, had demanded nothing of him. He
had lived as an outsider, an idler and onlooker, well liked in his
young manhood, alone in his illness and advancing years.
Seized with weariness, he sat down on the wall, and the
river murmured darkly in his thoughts. The light went on in a
window above him, warning him that it was late and that he must
not be found here. He slipped silently out of the tanning yard and
through the gate, buttoned up his coat and thought of sleep. He
had money that the doctor had given him, and after brief
reflection he went to a lodging house. He could have gone to the
Angel or the Swan, where he was known and would have found
friends. But he was not in the mood.
There were many new sights in the town, and formerly
every one of them would have interested him; now he wished to
see nothing but what brought back the old times. Then when he
learned that Franziska was dead, everything paled and it seemed
to him that he had come here solely on her account. No, there was
no point in roaming about the streets and pathways, where all
those who knew him greeted him with cries of jocose
commiseration. When he chanced to pass the health
commissioner in one of the narrow streets, it suddenly occurred to
him that the hospital people might send someone in search of him.
He went to a bakery and bought two rolls, which he stuffed in his
coat pockets. It was not yet noon when he left the city by a road
leading into the mountains.
High above the town, at the last bend before the forest, a
dust-covered man was sitting on a pile of rocks, pounding the
gray-blue shell-lime to pieces with a long-handled hammer.
Knulp looked at him, called out a greeting, and stopped.
"Grьss Gott," said the man, and went on pounding without
raising his head.
"Looks like the weather's due for a change," Knulp
ventured.
"Could be," the stone-breaker grumbled, and looked up,
dazzled by the bright light. "Where you heading for?"
"Rome, to see the Pope," said Knulp. "Is it far?"
"You won't get there today. If you stop every few steps and
bother people when they're trying to work, you won't make it in a
year."
"Maybe not. Well, I'm in no hurry, thank goodness. You're a
hard worker, Andres Schaible."
The stone-breaker shaded his eyes with his hand and looked
at the wayfarer.
"Hm, you know me," he said thoughtfully, "and I think I
know you too. I've only got to remember the name."
"Suppose you ask the old landlord at the Crab. We used to
hang out there back in '90. But I guess he's dead."
"Has been for years. Ah, now I've got it. You're Knulp. Sit
down a while. And, grьss Gott!"
Knulp sat down, he had climbed rapidly and his breath came
hard. Now, looking down, he saw how lovely the little city was in
the valley; the sparkling blue river, the red-brown jumble of roofs,
and the little green islets of trees in between.
"You've got it good up here," he said, panting.
"It's all right. I can't complain. But what about you? Not the
climber you used to be, eh? You're wheezing something awful,
Knulp. Visiting the old town again?"
"That's right, Schaible. For the last time, I guess."
"What do you mean?"
"My lungs are shot. You wouldn't know a remedy?"
"If you'd stayed home, friend, and kept your nose to the
grindstone; if you'd had a wife and children and a warm bed at
night, maybe you'd be all right. But you remember the way I felt
about it. Now it's too late. Is it as bad as all that?"
"I don't know. -- Well, yes, I do know. It's downhill,
Schaible, every day a little faster. Good thing I'm all alone in the
world and no burden to anybody."
"Whichever way you take it. That's your business. But I'm
sorry to hear it."
"No need to be. We've all got to die some day, it even comes
to stone-breakers. Yes, old-timer, here we sit, and neither of us
has much call for rejoicing. You had different plans for yourself
once. Didn't you want to work for the railroad?"
"Oh, that's ancient history."
"And your children? Are they well?"
"As far as I know. Jakob's working."
"Really? The time passes. Well, I'll be going now."
"What's the hurry? After all these years. Look, Knulp. Can I
help you? I haven't got much on me, maybe half a mark."
"You can use it yourself. Thanks all the same."
He wanted to say something more, but his chest ached
wretchedly and he fell silent. The stone-breaker gave him a drink
from his cider bottle. For a time they looked down at the town,
the millrace flashed in the sunlight, a wagon drove slowly over
the stone bridge, and below the weir a gaggle of white geese
swam indolently to and fro.
"I'll be getting on," Knulp announced once more. "I'm rested
now."
The stone-breaker sat deep in thought. He shook his head.
"You know," he said slowly, "you could have been
something more than a poor tramp. It's a damn shame. I've never
been a psalm singer, but I believe what it says in the Bible. You'd
better be thinking about it too. You'll have to answer for yourself,
and it won't be easy. You had gifts, more than a lot of other
people, and you made no use of them. Don't be angry with me for
saying so."
Knulp smiled; there was a glimmer of the old innocent
mischief in his eyes. He gave Schaible a friendly tap on the
shoulder and stood up.
"We'll see, Schaible. Maybe God won't ask me why I didn't
get to be a judge. Maybe he'll just say: Back again, you old fool? -
- and give me an easy job minding children, or some such thing."
Andres Schaible shrugged his shoulders under his blue-andwhite checked shirt.
"No use trying to be serious with you. You think God will
just crack jokes when Knulp comes along."
"Not at all. -- Or maybe he will."
"Don't talk like that."
They shook hands and the stone-breaker supped Knulp a
small coin that he had secretly dug out of his trousers pocket. And
not wishing to spoil his old friend's pleasure, Knulp took it
without protest.
He cast a last glance down into his native valley and nodded
once more to Andres Schaible. Then, seized with a fit of
coughing, he hurried off. He soon rounded the bend and vanished
behind the woods.
Two weeks later, after a period of cold fog had given way to
sunny days brightened by late bluebells and cool ripe
blackberries, the winter suddenly set in. First, three days of bitter
cold; then, as the cold abated, a fast, heavy snowfall.
All this time Knulp had been circling aimlessly, never
leaving his home ground; twice, hidden in the woods, he had seen
Schaible, but he had not called out. He had too much to think
about. In the course of his long, useless marches he had sunk
deeper and deeper into the tangle of his botched life as into a
clump of brambles, and still he had found no meaning or
consolation. Then, feeling very sick and faint, he had thought of
returning to Gerbersau and knocking at the door of the hospital.
But when after days of being alone he saw the town down below,
the sounds that rose up to him were alien and hostile, and he knew
that the town was no longer his place. From time to time he
bought a piece of bread in one of the villages, and there were
plenty of hazelnuts. He spent the nights in woodcutters' cabins or
in the fields, bedded in straw.
Now he was crossing back from Wolf Mountain through the
snowstorm, tired and wasted but still on the move, trudging on,
exploring every copse and clearing, as though to make the most of
his last meager provision of days. Sick and tired as he was, his
eyes and nose were still alert; peering and sniffing like a hunting
dog, he registered every rise and fall in the ground, every breeze,
every animal track, though he no longer had any aim in view. His
will had left him and his legs moved of their own accord.
In his thoughts he was talking with God; for several days he
had been with Him almost uninterruptedly. He was not afraid; he
knew that God can do us no harm. They were talking about the
futility of Knulp's life: how things might have been managed
differently and why this and that had had to be as it was and not
otherwise.
"That was the time," Knulp repeated over and over again.
"When I was fourteen and Franziska failed me. Everything was
still possible. And then something went to pieces inside me; from
then on I was no good. -- You should have let me die when I was
fourteen. That was the big mistake. Then my life would have been
as beautiful and perfect as a ripe apple."
But God smiled all the while, and sometimes his face
disappeared in the driving snow.
"Come along, Knulp," he said reprovingly. "Think of your
youth, that summer in the Odenwald and the times in Lдchstetten.
Didn't you dance like a deer, didn't you feel the joy of life in
every bone? Didn't you sing and play the accordion till all the
girls had tears in their eyes? Do you remember the Sundays in
Bauerswil? And Henriette, your first sweetheart? Was all that
nothing?"
Knulp thought back, and the joys of his youth flared up in
their dark beauty like distant fires in the mountains; they had the
heavy sweet fragrance of honey and wine and the deep rich sound
of the warm night wind at the approach of spring. Dear Lord, how
lovely it had been, how lovely in joy and sorrow, and what a pity
if he had lost a single day of it!
"Yes," he admitted, "it was beautiful." Yet he felt tearful and
cranky, like a tired child. "It was beautiful in those days. True,
there was sadness even then, and sometimes a feeling of guilt. But
it's true, those were good years. Surely few men have drunk so
deeply or danced so grandly or known such nights of love as I
did. But it should have ended then. Even in those days there was a
drop of bitterness, I remember well, and after that there were
never again such good times. No, never again."
God had vanished in a snow flurry. Knulp stopped for a
moment to catch his breath and spit a drop or two of blood into
the snow. And suddenly God was there to answer him.
"See here, Knulp, aren't you a bit ungrateful? You make me
laugh with your forgetfulness. We've remembered the time when
you were king of the dance floor, we've remembered your
Henriette, and you've had to admit there was a point to all that,
that those days were good and beautiful and brought you
happiness. But, my dear fellow, if that's the way you feel about
Henriette, you must have a thought or two for Lisabeth. Have you
forgotten her entirely?"
And again a stretch of the past lay before Knulp's eyes like a
distant mountain range. And though it was not quite so happy and
carefree as the days that had gone before, it shone with a deeper
fervor, with the quiet light of a woman smiling through tears.
Long-forgotten days and hours rose from their graves. And in the
midst of them stood Lisabeth with lovely sad eyes, holding her
little boy in her arms.
"I've been a bad man!" he lamented. "After Lisabeth died, I
had no right to go on living."
But God interrupted him. With a piercing look of his bright
eyes, he said: "Enough of that, Knulp. You hurt Lisabeth very
much, we can't change that, but you know perfectly well that the
kindness and tenderness you gave her outweighed the harm, and
that she was never angry with you for one moment. You childish
fellow! Can't you see what it all means? Can't you see that you
had to be a gadabout and a vagabond to bring people a bit of
child's folly and child's laughter wherever you went? To make all
sorts of people love you a little and tease you a little and be a little
grateful to you?"
After a short silence Knulp admitted in a whisper: "Yes,
come to think of it, you're right. But that was all in the old days,
when I was young. Why didn't I learn a lesson from all that and
make something of myself? There was still time."
The snow was no longer fairing. Again Knulp stopped to
rest. He meant to shake the snow off his hat and clothes, but he
didn't get around to it, he was tired and lost in thought. Now God
was standing right before him, His wide-open eyes gleaming like
the sun.
"Let well enough alone," said God. "What's the good of
complaining? Don't you see that whatever happened was good
and right, that nothing should have been any different? Would
you really want to be a gentleman now, or a master craftsman
with a wife and children, reading the paper by the fireside?
Wouldn't you run away again this minute to sleep in the woods
with the foxes and set traps for birds and catch lizards?"
Again Knulp started off, unaware that he was staggering
with weariness. He felt much happier now and nodded gratefully
to everything God said.
"Look," said God. "I wanted you the way you are and no
different. You were a wanderer in my name and wherever you
went you brought the settled folk a little homesickness for
freedom. In my name, you did silly things and people scoffed at
you; I myself was scoffed at in you and loved in you. You are my
child and my brother and a part of me. There is nothing you have
enjoyed and suffered that I have not enjoyed and suffered with
you."
"Yes," said Knulp, nodding heavily. "Yes, that's true, and
deep down I've always known it."
He lay resting in the snow. His weary limbs had grown light
and his inflamed eyes smiled.
When he closed them to sleep a little, he still heard God's
voice speaking and still looked into His bright eyes.
"So you've nothing more to complain about?" God's voiced
asked.
"Nothing more," Knulp nodded with a shy laugh.
"And everything's all right? Everything is as it should be?"
"Yes," he nodded. "Everything is as it should be."
God's voice became softer. Now it sounded like his mother's
voice, now like Henriette's, and now like the good, gentle voice of
Lisabeth.
When Knulp opened his eyes again, the sun was shining. It
dazzled him so that he quickly lowered his lids. He felt the snow
lying heavy on his hands and wanted to shake it off, but the desire
to sleep had grown stronger than any other desire.
found that he could best render "the inner reality of Castalia" through the figure of a
dominating central figure. "And so Knecht stepped into the center of the narrative." In
fact, in the first three chapters of his biography we get a far clearer idea of the Castalian
ideal at its finest than in the narrator's more abstract introduction.
But Joseph Knecht ends by defecting from Castalia, a conclusion that was far
from Hesse's mind when he first dreamed of this new version of the spiritual kingdom
and when he wrote the first of the lives. At least two factors contributed to change
Hesse's attitude toward the ideal which he had been striving to portray in so many works
for almost twenty years. First, the sheer reality of contemporary events -- the
disintegration of the Weimar Republic, the rise of Hitler, the horrors of Nazism -- opened
Hesse's eyes to the failure of the intellectuals and convinced him of the futility of any
spiritual realm divorced wholly from contemporary social reality. His ideal had to give
way, he wrote, "under the pressures of the moment." This is the meaning that emerges
clearly from young Knecht's debates with that emissary from the outside world, Plinio
Designori, who argues that a life consecrated exclusively to the mind is not only
unfruitful, but also dangerous. Fritz Tegularius, the brilliant scholar who is totally unfit
for any position of responsibility in the order, is the living example of the excesses of an
aestheticism cultivated in isolation from reality. Secondly, Hesse's growing uneasiness
regarding an absolute spiritual kingdom was substantiated by his study of Burckhardt's
writings. It is Burckhardt, in the person of Father Jacobus, who convinces Knecht-Hesse
that even the most perfect spiritual institution, in the eyes of history, is a relative
organism. In order to survive it must adapt itself to the social exigencies of the times. The
central chapters of the biography, therefore, recapitulate in fictional form Hesse's own
shift from his original belief in a haughty Nietzschean elitism to a more compassionate
social consciousness -- shaped by Burckhardt's historicism. The ideological tensions
between Knecht, Plinio, and Father Jacobus reflect on the level of character the areas of
Culture, State, and Church, whose complex interrelationships Burckhardt investigated in
his Observations on World History (a course of lectures delivered in 1870-1871 and
posthumously published in 1905).
Seen in this light and put into the contemporary idiom, Knecht's life represents
typologically the radicalization of the intellectual, who moves from the vita
contemplativa not to the opposite extreme of the vita activa, but to an intermediate
position of responsible action controlled by dispassionate reflection. It is essential to
understand that Knecht's defection from Castalia, far from implying any repudiation of
the spiritual ideal, simply calls for a new consciousness of the social responsibility of the
intellectual. Knecht remains true to his name, which means "servant." Now his service
takes on a fuller meaning. By quitting Castalia, Knecht fulfills two functions. He serves
Castalia by warning it, through his example, to forsake its posture of arrogant and selfindulgent autonomy, which can lead ultimately only to its destruction. And he makes a
commitment by putting spirit and intellect at the service of the world outside in the
person of his pupil, the youth Tito. Knecht's death has been variously interpreted, and
certainly that final scene has symbolic overtones that expand its dimensions. But Hesse
made its basic meaning quite clear in a letter of 1947. "He leaves behind a Tito for whom
this sacrificial death of a man vastly superior to him will remain forever an admonition
and an example." The spiritual ideal, once attained, has now been put back into the
service of life.
The Glass Bead Game, then, is indispensable for a complete understanding of
Hesse's thought. It is possible to read Siddhartha as a self-centered pursuit of nirvana, but
Joseph Knecht gives up his life out of a sense of commitment to a fellow human being. It
is possible to see in Steppenwolf a heady glorification of hip or even hippie culture, but
Joseph Knecht shows that the only true culture is that which responds to the social
requirements of the times. The Glass Bead Game, finally, makes it clear that Hesse
advocates thoughtful commitment over self-indulgent solipsism, responsible action over
mindless revolt. For Joseph Knecht is no impetuous radical thrusting non-negotiable
demands upon the institution and demanding amnesty from the consequences of his
deeds. He attains through disciplined achievement the highest status in the Order and
commits himself to action only after thoughtfully assessing its implications for Castalia
and the consequences for himself. Above all -- for the novel is not a philosophical tract or
a political pamphlet, but a work of art -- Hesse suggests that revolt need not be irrational
and violent, that indeed it is more effective when it is rational and ironic. This is the value
of the temporal distance, the double perspective vouchsafed by the fiction. In the
Introduction, looking back at our own civilization from the vantage point of the future,
we see it in all its glaring self-contradictions. At the same time, we look ahead to the
Castalia of the future, where the problems of our age are displayed in a realistic
abstraction that permits us to consider them rationally and dispassionately. Castalia has
more than a little in common with the intellectual and cultural institutions of the sixties,
to the extent that they have become autonomous empires cut off from the social needs of
mankind and cultivating their own Glass Bead Games in glorious isolation. And Knecht's
conviction that a State ruled without the tempering influence of Culture is doomed to
brutishness reflects a prevalent contemporary concern: our computerized society has
become so bureaucratically impersonal that it is no longer guided sufficiently by forces
that are in the highest sense humane. The longer we consider Hesse's novel, the more
clearly we realize that it is not a telescope focused on an imaginary future, but a mirror
reflecting with disturbing sharpness a paradigm of present reality.
All of these considerations justify a new translation of Hesse's late masterpiece.
Our society has caught up with his vision. And Richard and Clara Winston have
produced a translation that is eminently usable for this age. I do not mean merely that
their translation is "correct" in avoiding the many mistakes of the earlier English version.
More important: they have succeeded in catching the sense and style of the book. They
realize that with this last novel Hesse shifted his focus from the individual to the
institution; hence they have not made the mistake of calling it Magister Ludi, which
would suggest that it is simply another German Bildungsroman, a pretty fiction of
personal development unrelated to the more general concerns of society. Instead, they
have reinstated the title that Hesse gave to the original (Das Glasperlenspiel), which
sums up in a word the glory and tragedy of culture in our time. By capturing the monkish
tone of the narrator, who repeats himself with clerical pedantry, the translation opens up
the irony of the work. For the Castalian self-obsession from which Knecht defects is
nowhere more evident than in the smug complacency of the narrator in the Introduction
and opening chapters. Ironically, as he learns to appreciate the meaning of Knecht's life
by writing his biography, the narrator assumes a more humane and, in the finest sense,
"spiritual" tone, thus vindicating Knecht's action.
Perhaps even the worst translation could not conceal the "message" of Hesse's
novel. But only a subtle, sensitive one can render what Thomas Mann called "the parody
of biography and the grave scholarly attitude." It is easy, too easy, to be sober and grave.
That is in fact the most serious shortcoming of Hesse's most ardent admirers at present.
This new translation of The Glass Bead Game offers the American reader the
opportunity, as Thomas Mann suggested, to dare to laugh. If parody alone can adequately
render the reality of our times, only irony offers us the freedom and detachment that are
the essential condition of responsible analysis and action. This is the final aesthetic
meaning of The Glass Bead Game.
May 1969
THEODORE ZIOLKOWSKI
THE GLASS BEAD GAME
A tentative sketch of the life of
Magister Ludi Joseph Knecht
together with
Knecht's posthumous writings
edited by
HERMANN HESSE
dedicated to
the Journeyers
to the East
CONTENTS
The Glass Bead Game: A General Introduction to Its History for the Layman
The Life of Magister Ludi Joseph Knecht
1 The Call
2 Waldzell
3 Years of Freedom
4 Two Orders
5 The Mission
6 Magister Ludi
7 In Office
8 The Two Poles
9 A Conversation
10 Preparations
11 The Circular Letter
12 The Legend
Joseph Knecht's Posthumous Writings
The Poems of Knecht's Student Years
The Three Lives
1 The Rainmaker
2 The Father Confessor
3 The Indian Life
THE
GLASS BEAD
GAME:
A GENERAL
INTRODUCTION TO
ITS HISTORY
FOR THE
LAYMAN
. . .Non entia enim licet quodammodo levibusque hominibus facilius atque
incuriosius verbis reddere quam entia, veruntamen pio diligentique rerum scriptori plane
aliter res se habet: nihil tantum repugnat ne verbis illustretur, at nihil adeo necesse est
ante hominum oculos proponere ut certas quasdam res, quas esse neque demonstrari
neque probari potest, quae contra eo ipso, quod pii diligentesque viri illas quasi ut entia
tractant, enti nascendique facultati paululum appropinquant.
ALBERTUS SECUNDUS
tract. de cristall. spirit.
ed. Clangor et Collof. lib. I, cap. 28.
In Joseph Knecht's holograph translation:
. . .For although in a certain sense and for light-minded persons non-existent
things can be more easily and irresponsibly represented in words than existing things,
for the serious and conscientious historian it is just the reverse. Nothing is harder, yet
nothing is more necessary, than to speak of certain things whose existence is neither
demonstrable nor probable. The very fact that serious and conscientious men treat them
as existing things brings them a step closer to existence and to the possibility of being
born.
IT is OUR intention to preserve in these pages what scant biographical material we
have been able to collect concerning Joseph Knecht, or Ludi Magister Josephus III, as he
is called in the Archives of the Glass Bead Game. We are not unaware that this endeavor
runs, or seems to run, somewhat counter to the prevailing laws and usages of our
intellectual life. For, after all, obliteration of individuality, the maximum integration of
the individual into the hierarchy of the educators and scholars, has ever been one of our
ruling principles. And in the course of our long tradition this principle has been observed
with such thoroughness that today it is exceedingly difficult, and in many cases
completely impossible, to obtain biographical and psychological information on various
persons who have served the hierarchy in exemplary fashion. In very many cases it is no
longer even possible to determine their original names. The hierarchic organization
cherishes the ideal of anonymity, and comes very close to the realization of that ideal.
This fact remains one of the abiding characteristics of intellectual life in our Province.
If we have nevertheless persisted in our endeavor to determine some of the facts
about the life of Ludi Magister Josephus III, and at least to sketch the outlines of his
character, we believe we have done so not out of any cult of personality, nor out of
disobedience to the customs, but on the contrary solely in the service of truth and
scholarship. It is an old idea that the more pointedly and logically we formulate a thesis,
the more irresistibly it cries out for its antithesis. We uphold and venerate the idea that
underlies the anonymity of our authorities and our intellectual life. But a glance at the
early history of that life of the mind we now lead, namely, a glance at the development of
the Glass Bead Game, shows us irrefutably that every phase of its development, every
extension, every change, every essential segment of its history, whether it be seen as
progressive or conservative, bears the plain imprint of the person who introduced the
change. He was not necessarily its sole or actual author, but he was the instrument of
transformation and perfection.
Certainly, what nowadays we understand by personality is something quite
different from what the biographers and historians of earlier times meant by it. For them,
and especially for the writers of those days who had a distinct taste for biography, the
essence of a personality seems to have been deviance, abnormality, uniqueness, in fact all
too often the pathological. We moderns, on the other hand, do not even speak of major
personalities until we encounter men who have gone beyond all original and idiosyncratic
qualities to achieve the greatest possible integration into the generality, the greatest
possible service to the suprapersonal. If we look closely into the matter we shall see that
the ancients had already perceived this ideal. The figure of the Sage or Perfect One
among the ancient Chinese, for example, or the ideal of Socratic ethics, can scarcely be
distinguished from our present ideal; and many a great organization, such as the Roman
Church in the eras of its greatest power, has recognized similar principles. Indeed, many
of its greatest figures, such as St. Thomas Aquinas, appear to us -- like early Greek
sculptures -- more the classical representatives of types than individuals.
Nevertheless, in the period before the reformation of the intellectual life, a
reformation which began in the twentieth century and of which we are the heirs, that
authentic ancient ideal had patently come near to being entirely lost. We are astonished
when the biographies of those times rather garrulously relate how many brothers and
sisters the hero had, or what psychological scars and blotches were left behind from his
casting off the skins of childhood and puberty, from the struggle for position and the
search for love. We moderns are not interested in a hero's pathology or family history,
nor in his drives, his digestion, and how he sleeps. Not even his intellectual background --
the influence upon his development of his favorite studies, favorite reading, and so on --
is particularly important to us. For us, a man is a hero and deserves special interest only if
his nature and his education have rendered him able to let his individuality be almost
perfectly absorbed in its hierarchic function without at the same time forfeiting the
vigorous, fresh, admirable impetus which make for the savor and worth of the individual.
And if conflicts arise between the individual and the hierarchy, we regard these very
conflicts as a touchstone for the stature of a personality. We do not approve of the rebel
who is driven by his desires and passions to infringements upon law and order; we find
all the more worthy of our reverence the memory of those who tragically sacrificed
themselves for the greater whole.
These latter are the heroes, and in the case of these truly exemplary men, interest
in the individual, in the name, face, and gesture, seems to us permissible and natural. For
we do not regard even the perfect hierarchy, the most harmonious organization, as a
machine put together out of lifeless units that count for nothing in themselves, but as a
living body, formed of parts and animated by organs which possess their own nature and
freedom. Every one of them shares in the miracle of life. In this sense, then, we have
endeavored to obtain information on the life of Joseph Knecht, Master of the Glass Bead
Game, and especially to collect everything written by himself. We have, moreover,
obtained several manuscripts we consider worth reading.
What we have to say about Knecht's personality and life is surely familiar in
whole or in part to a good many members of the Order, especially the Glass Bead Game
players, and for this reason among others our book is not addressed to this circle alone,
but is intended to appeal more widely to sympathetic readers.
For the narrower circle, our book would need neither introduction nor
commentary. But since we also wish our hero's life and writings to be studied outside the
Order, we are confronted with the somewhat difficult task of prefacing our book with a
brief popular introduction, for that less-prepared reader, into the meaning and history of
the Glass Bead Game. We stress that this introduction is intended only for popular
consumption and makes no claim whatsoever to clarifying the questions being discussed
within the Order itself on the problems and history of the Game. The time for an
objective account of that subject is still far in the future.
Let no one, therefore, expect from us a complete history and theory of the Glass
Bead Game. Even authors of higher rank and competence than ourself would not be
capable of providing that at the present time. That task must remain reserved to later
ages, if the sources and the intellectual prerequisites for the task have not previously been
lost. Still less is our essay intended as a textbook of the Glass Bead Game; indeed, no
such thing will ever be written. The only way to learn the rules of this Game of games is
to take the usual prescribed course, which requires many years; and none of the initiates
could ever possibly have any interest in making these rules easier to learn.
These rules, the sign language and grammar of the Game, constitute a kind of
highly developed secret language drawing upon several sciences and arts, but especially
mathematics and music (and/or musicology), and capable of expressing and establishing
interrelationships between the content and conclusions of nearly all scholarly disciplines.
The Glass Bead Game is thus a mode of playing with the total contents and values of our
culture; it plays with them as, say, in the great age of the arts a painter might have played
with the colors on his palette. All the insights, noble thoughts, and works of art that the
human race has produced in its creative eras, all that subsequent periods of scholarly
study have reduced to concepts and converted into intellectual property -- on all this
immense body of intellectual values the Glass Bead Game player plays like the organist
on an organ. And this organ has attained an almost unimaginable perfection; its manuals
and pedals range over the entire intellectual cosmos; its stops are almost beyond number.
Theoretically this instrument is capable of reproducing in the Game the entire intellectual
content of the universe. These manuals, pedals, and stops are now fixed. Changes in their
number and order, and attempts at perfecting them, are actually no longer feasible except
in theory. Any enrichment of the language of the Game by addition of new contents is
subject to the strictest conceivable control by the directorate of the Game. On the other
hand, within this fixed structure, or to abide by our image, within the complicated
mechanism of this giant organ, a whole universe of possibilities and combinations is
available to the individual player. For even two out of a thousand stringently played
games to resemble each other more than superficially is hardly possible. Even if it should
so happen that two players by chance were to choose precisely the same small assortment
of themes for the content of their Game, these two Games could present an entirely
different appearance and run an entirely different course, depending on the qualities of
mind, character, mood, and virtuosity of the players.
How far back the historian wishes to place the origins and antecedents of the
Glass Bead Game is, ultimately, a matter of his personal choice. For like every great idea
it has no real beginning; rather, it has always been, at least the idea of it. We find it
foreshadowed, as a dim anticipation and hope, in a good many earlier ages. There are
hints of it in Pythagoras, for example, and then among Hellenistic Gnostic circles in the
late period of classical civilization. We find it equally among the ancient Chinese, then
again at the several pinnacles of Arabic-Moorish culture; and the path of its prehistory
leads on through Scholasticism and Humanism to the academies of mathematicians of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and on to the Romantic philosophies and the runes
of Novalis's hallucinatory visions. This same eternal idea, which for us has been
embodied in the Glass Bead Game, has underlain every movement of Mind toward the
ideal goal of a universitas litterarum, every Platonic academy, every league of an
intellectual elite, every rapprochement between the exact and the more liberal disciplines,
every effort toward reconciliation between science and art or science and religion. Men
like Abelard, Leibniz, and Hegel unquestionably were familiar with the dream of
capturing the universe of the intellect in concentric systems, and pairing the living beauty
of thought and art with the magical expressiveness of the exact sciences. In that age in
which music and mathematics almost simultaneously attained classical heights,
approaches and cross-fertilizations between the two disciplines occurred frequently. And
two centuries earlier we find in Nicholas of Cues sentences of the same tenor, such as
this: "The mind adapts itself to potentiality in order to measure everything in the mode of
potentiality, and to absolute necessity in order to measure everything in the mode of unity
and simplicity as God does, and to the necessity of nexus in order to measure everything
with respect to its peculiar nature; finally, it adapts itself to determinate potentiality in
order to measure everything with respect to its existence. But furthermore the mind also
measures symbolically, by comparison, as when it employs numerals and geometric
figures and equates other things with them."
Incidentally, this is not the only one of Nicholas's ideas that almost seems to
suggest our Glass Bead Game, or corresponds to and springs from a similar branch of the
imagination as the play of thought which occurs in the Game. Many similar echoes can
be found in his writings. His pleasure in mathematics also, and his delight and skill in
using constructions and axioms of Euclidean geometry as similes to clarify theological
and philosophical concepts, likewise appear to be very close to the mentality of the
Game. At times even his peculiar Latin (abounding in words of his own coinage, whose
meaning, however, was perfectly plain to any Latin scholar) calls to mind the
improvisatory agility of the Game's language.
As the epigraph of our treatise may already have suggested, Albertus Secundus
deserves an equal place among the ancestors of the Glass Bead Game. And we suspect,
although we cannot prove this by citations, that the idea of the Game also dominated the
minds of those learned musicians of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries
who based their musical compositions on mathematical speculations. Here and there in
the ancient literatures we encounter legends of wise and mysterious games that were
conceived and played by scholars, monks, or the courtiers of cultured princes. These
might take the form of chess games in which the pieces and squares had secret meanings
in addition to their usual functions. And of course everyone has heard those fables and
legends from the formative years of all civilizations which ascribe to music powers far
greater than those of any mere art: the capacity to control men and nations. These
accounts make of music a kind of secret regent, or a lawbook for men and their
governments. From the most ancient days of China to the myths of the Greeks we find
the concept of an ideal, heavenly life for men under the hegemony of music. The Glass
Bead Game is intimately bound up with this cult of music ("in eternal transmutations the
secret power of song greets us here below," says Novalis).
Although we thus recognize the idea of the Game as eternally present, and
therefore existent in vague stirrings long before it became a reality, its realization in the
form we know it nevertheless has its specific history. We shall now attempt to give a
brief account of the most important stages in that history.
The beginnings of the intellectual movement whose fruits are, among many
others, the establishment of the Order and the Glass Bead Game itself, may be traced
back to a period which Plinius Ziegenhalss, the historian of literature, designated as the
Age of the Feuilleton, by which name it has been known ever since. Such tags are pretty,
but dangerous; they constantly tempt us to a biased view of the era in question. And as a
matter of fact the Age of the Feuilleton was by no means uncultured; it was not even
intellectually impoverished. But if we may believe Ziegenhalss, that age appears to have
had only the dimmest notion of what to do with culture. Or rather, it did not know how to
assign culture its proper place within the economy of life and the nation. To be frank, we
really are very poorly informed about that era, even though it is the soil out of which
almost everything that distinguishes our cultural life today has grown.
It was, according to Ziegenhalss, an era emphatically "bourgeois" and given to an
almost untrammeled individualism. If in order to suggest the atmosphere we cite some of
its features from Ziegenhalss' description, we may at least do so with the confidence that
these features have not been invented, badly drawn, or grossly exaggerated. For the great
scholar has documented them from a vast number of literary and other sources. We take
our cue from this scholar, who so far has been the sole serious investigator of the
Feuilletonistic Age. As we read, we should remember that it is easy and foolish to sneer
at the mistakes or barbarities of remote ages.
Since the end of the Middle Ages, intellectual life in Europe seems to have
evolved along two major lines. The first of these was the liberation of thought and belief
from the sway of all authority. In practice this meant the struggle of Reason, which at last
felt it had come of age and won its independence, against the domination of the Roman
Church. The second trend, on the other hand, was the covert but passionate search for a
means to confer legitimacy on this freedom, for a new and sufficient authority arising out
of Reason itself. We can probably generalize and say that Mind has by and large won this
often strangely contradictory battle for two aims basically at odds with each other.
Has the gain been worth the countless victims? Has our present structure of the
life of the mind been sufficiently developed, and is it likely to endure long enough, to
justify as worthwhile sacrifices all the sufferings, convulsions, and abnormalities: the
trials of heretics, the burnings at stake, the many "geniuses" who ended in madness or
suicide? For us, it is not permissible to ask these questions. History is as it has happened.
Whether it was good, whether it would have been better not to have happened, whether
we will or will not acknowledge that it has had "meaning" -- all this is irrelevant. Thus
those struggles for the "freedom" of the human intellect likewise "happened," and
subsequently, in the course of the aforementioned Age of the Feuilleton, men came to
enjoy an incredible degree of intellectual freedom, more than they could stand. For while
they had overthrown the tutelage of the Church completely, and that of the State partially,
they had not succeeded in formulating an authentic law they could respect, a genuinely
new authority and legitimacy. Ziegenhalss recounts some truly astonishing examples of
the intellect's debasement, venality, and self-betrayal during that period.
We must confess that we cannot provide an unequivocal definition of those
products from which the age takes its name, the feuilletons. They seem to have formed an
uncommonly popular section of the daily newspapers, were produced by the millions, and
were a major source of mental pabulum for the reader in want of culture. They reported
on, or rather "chatted" about, a thousand-and-one items of knowledge. It would seem,
moreover, that the cleverer among the writers of them poked fun at their own work.
Ziegenhalss, at any rate, contends that many such pieces are so incomprehensible that
they can only be viewed as self-persiflage on the part of the authors. Quite possibly these
manufactured articles do indeed contain a quantity of irony and self-mockery which
cannot be understood until the key is found again. The producers of these trivia were in
some cases attached to the staffs of the newspapers; in other cases they were free-lance
scriveners. Frequently they enjoyed the high-sounding title of "writer," but a great many
of them seem to have belonged to the scholar class. Quite a few were celebrated
university professors.
Among the favorite subjects of such essays were anecdotes taken from the lives or
correspondence of famous men and women. They bore such titles as "Friedrich Nietzsche
and Women's Fashions of 1870," or "The Composer Rossini's Favorite Dishes," or "The
Role of the Lapdog in the Lives of Great Courtesans," and so on. Another popular type of
article was the historical background piece on what was currently being talked about
among the well-to-do, such as "The Dream of Creating Gold Through the Centuries," or
"Physico-chemical Experiments in Influencing the Weather," and hundreds of similar
subjects. When we look at the titles that Ziegenhalss cites, we feel surprise that there
should have been people who devoured such chitchat for their daily reading; but what
astonishes us far more is that authors of repute and of decent education should have
helped to "service" this gigantic consumption of empty whimsies. Significantly, "service"
was the expression used; it was also the word denoting the relationship of man to the
machine at that time.
In some periods interviews with well-known personalities on current problems
were particularly popular. Ziegenhalss devotes a separate chapter to these. Noted
chemists or piano virtuosos would be queried about politics, for example, or popular
actors, dancers, gymnasts, aviators, or even poets would be drawn out on the benefits and
drawbacks of being a bachelor, or on the presumptive causes of financial crises, and so
on. All that mattered in these pieces was to link a well-known name with a subject of
current topical interest. The reader may consult Ziegenhalss for some truly startling
examples; he gives hundreds.
As we have said, no doubt a goodly dash of irony was mixed in with all this busy
productivity; it may even have been a demonic irony, the irony of desperation -- it is very
hard indeed for us to put ourselves in the place of those people so that we can truly
understand them. But the great majority, who seem to have been strikingly fond of
reading, must have accepted all these grotesque things with credulous earnestness. If a
famous painting changed owners, if a precious manuscript was sold at auction, if an old
palace burned down, if the bearer of an aristocratic name was involved in a scandal, the
readers of many thousands of feature articles at once learned the facts. What is more, on
that same day or by the next day at the latest they received an additional dose of
anecdotal, historical, psychological, erotic, and other stuff on the catchword of the
moment. A torrent of zealous scribbling poured out over every ephemeral incident, and in
quality, assortment, and phraseology all this material bore the mark of mass goods
rapidly and irresponsibly turned out.
Incidentally, there appear to have been certain games which were regular
concomitants of the feature article. The readers themselves took the active role in these
games, which put to use some of their glut of information fodder. A long disquisition by
Ziegenhalss on the curious subject of "Crossword Puzzles" describes the phenomenon.
Thousands upon thousands of persons, the majority of whom did heavy work and led a
hard life, spent their leisure hours sitting over squares and crosses made of letters of the
alphabet, filling in the gaps according to certain rules. But let us be wary of seeing only
the absurd or insane aspect of this, and let us abstain from ridiculing it. For these people
with their childish puzzle games and their cultural feature articles were by no means
innocuous children or playful Phæacians. Rather, they dwelt anxiously among political,
economic, and moral ferments and earthquakes, waged a number of frightful wars and
civil wars, and their little cultural games were not just charming, meaningless
childishness. These games sprang from their deep need to close their eyes and flee from
unsolved problems and anxious forebodings of doom into an imaginary world as
innocuous as possible. They assiduously learned to drive automobiles, to play difficult
card games and lose themselves in crossword puzzles -- for they faced death, fear, pain,
and hunger almost without defenses, could no longer accept the consolations of the
churches, and could obtain no useful advice from Reason. These people who read so
many articles and listened to so many lectures did not take the time and trouble to
strengthen themselves against fear, to combat the dread of death within themselves; they
moved spasmodically on through life and had no belief in a tomorrow.
For there was also a good deal of lecturing, and we must briefly discuss this
somewhat more dignified variant of the feature article. Both specialists and intellectual
privateers supplied the middle-class citizens of the age (who were still deeply attached to
the notion of culture, although it had long since been robbed of its former meaning) with
large numbers of lectures. Such talks were not only in the nature of festival orations for
special occasions; there was a frantic trade in them, and they were given in almost
incomprehensible quantities. In those days the citizen of a medium-sized town or his wife
could at least once a week (in big cities pretty much every night) attend lectures offering
theoretical instruction on some subject or other: on works of art, poets, scholars,
researchers, world tours. The members of the audience at these lectures remained purely
passive, and although some relationship between audience and content, some previous
knowledge, preparation, and receptivity were tacitly assumed in most cases nothing of the
sort was present. There were entertaining, impassioned, or witty lectures on Goethe, say,
in which he would be depicted descending from a post chaise wearing a blue frock-coat
to seduce some Strassburg or Wetzlar girl; or on Arabic culture; in all of them a number
of fashionable phrases were shaken up like dice in a cup and everyone was delighted if he
dimly recognized one or two catchwords. People heard lectures on writers whose works
they had never read and never meant to, sometimes accompanied by pictures projected on
a screen. At these lectures, as in the feature articles in the newspapers, they struggled
through a deluge of isolated cultural facts and fragments of knowledge robbed of all
meaning. To put it briefly, they were already on the verge of that dreadful devaluation of
the Word which produced, at first in secret and within the narrowest circles, that
ascetically heroic counter-movement which soon afterward began to flow visibly and
powerfully, and ushered in the new self-discipline and dignity of the human intellect.
It must be granted that many aspects of the intellectual life of that era showed
energy and grandeur. We moderns explain its concomitant uncertainty and falseness as a
symptom of the horror which seized men when at the end of an era of apparent victory
and success they found themselves suddenly confronting a void: great material scarcity, a
period of political and military crises, and an accelerating distrust of the intellect itself, of
its own virtue and dignity and even of its own existence. Yet that very period, filled
though it was with premonitions of doom, was marked by some very fine intellectual
achievements, including the beginnings of a science of music of which we are the
grateful heirs.
But although it is easy to fit any given segment of the past neatly and intelligibly
into the patterns of world history, contemporaries are never able to see their own place in
the patterns. Consequently, even as intellectual ambitions and achievements declined
rapidly during that period, intellectuals in particular were stricken by terrible doubts and a
sense of despair. They had just fully realized (a discovery that had been in the air, here
and there, from the time of Nietzsche on) that the youth and the creative period of our
culture was over, that old age and twilight had set in. Suddenly everyone felt this and
many bluntly expressed this view; it was used to explain many of the alarming signs of
the time: the dreary mechanization of life, the profound debasement of morality, the
decline of faith among nations, the inauthenticity of art. The "music of decline" had
sounded, as in that wonderful Chinese fable; like a thrumming bass on the organ its
reverberations faded slowly out over decades; its throbbing could be heard in the
corruption of the schools, periodicals, and universities, in melancholia and insanity
among those artists and critics who could still be taken seriously; it raged as untrammeled
and amateurish overproduction in all the arts. Various attitudes could be taken toward this
enemy who had breached the walls and could no longer be exorcised. Some of the best
tacitly acknowledged and stoically endured the bitter truth. Some attempted to deny its
existence, and thanks to the shoddy thinking of some of the literary prophets of cultural
doom, found a good many weak points in their thesis. Moreover, those who took
exception to the aforementioned prophets could be sure of a hearing and influence among
the bourgeoisie. For the allegation that the culture he had only yesterday been proud to
possess was no longer alive, that the education and art he revered could no longer be
regarded as genuine education and genuine art, seemed to the bourgeois as brazen and
intolerable as the sudden inflations of currency and the revolutions which threatened his
accumulated capital.
Another possible immunization against the general mood of doom was cynicism.
People went dancing and dismissed all anxiety about the future as old-fashioned folly;
people composed heady articles about the approaching end of art, science, and language.
In that feuilleton world they had constructed of paper, people postulated the total
capitulation of Mind, the bankruptcy of ideas, and pretended to be looking on with
cynical calm or bacchantic rapture as not only art, culture, morality, and honesty, but also
Europe and "the world" proceeded to their doom. Among the good there prevailed a
quietly resigned gloom, among the wicked a malicious pessimism. The fact was that a
breakdown of outmoded forms, and a degree of reshuffling both of the world and its
morality by means of politics and war, had to take place before the culture itself became
capable of real self-analysis and a new organization.
Yet during the decades of transition this culture had not slumbered. Rather, during
the very period of its decay and seeming capitulation by the artists, professors, and
feature writers, it entered into a phase of intense alertness and self-examination. The
medium of this change lay in the consciences of a few individuals. Even during the
heyday of the feuilleton there were everywhere individuals and small groups who had
resolved to remain faithful to true culture and to devote all their energies to preserving for
the future a core of good tradition, discipline, method, and intellectual rigor. We are
today ignorant of many details, but in general the process of self-examination, reflection,
and conscious resistance to decline seems to have centered mostly in two groups. The
cultural conscience of scholars found refuge in the investigations and didactic methods of
the history of music, for this discipline was just reaching its height at that time, and even
in the midst of the feuilleton world two famous seminaries fostered an exemplary
methodology, characterized by care and thoroughness. Moreover, as if destiny wished to
smile comfortingly upon this tiny, brave cohort, at this saddest of times there took place
that glorious miracle which was in itself pure chance, but which gave the effect of a
divine corroboration: the rediscovery of eleven manuscripts of Johann Sebastian Bach,
which had been in the keeping of his son Friedemann.
A second focus of resistance to degeneration was the League of Journeyers to the
East. The brethren of that League cultivated a spiritual rather than an intellectual
discipline. They fostered piety and reverence, and to them we owe important elements in
our present form of cultural life and of the Glass Bead Game, in particular the
contemplative elements. The Journeyers also contributed to new insights into the nature
of our culture and the possibilities of its continuance, not so much by analytical and
scholarly work as by their capacity, based on ancient secret exercises, for mystic
identification with remote ages and cultural conditions. Among them, for example, were
itinerant instrumentalists and minstrels who were said to have the ability to perform the
music of earlier epochs with perfect ancient purity. Thus they could play and sing a piece
of music from 1600 or 1650 exactly as if all the subsequent modes, refinements, and
virtuoso achievements were still unknown. This was an astonishing feat in a period in
which the mania for dynamics and gradazione dominated all music-making, when the
music itself was almost forgotten in discussions of the conductor's execution and
"conception." When an orchestra of the Journeyers first publicly performed a suite from
the time before Handel completely without crescendi and diminuendi, with the naïveté
and chasteness of another age and world, some among the audience are said to have been
totally uncomprehending, but others listened with fresh attention and had the impression
that they were hearing music for the first time in their lives. In the League's concert hall
between Bremgarten and Morbio, one member built a Bach organ as perfectly as Johann
Sebastian Bach would have had it built had he had the means and opportunity. Obeying a
principle even then current in the League, the organ builder concealed his name, calling
himself Silbermann after his eighteenth-century predecessor.
In discussing these matters we have approached the sources from which our
modern concept of culture sprang. One of the chief of these was the most recent of the
scholarly disciplines, the history of music and the aesthetics of music. Another was the
great advance in mathematics that soon followed. To these was added a sprinkling of the
wisdom of the Journeyers to the East and, closely related to the new conception and
interpretation of music, that courageous new attitude, compounded of serenity and
resignation, toward the aging of cultures. It would be pointless to say much about these
matters here, since they are familiar to everyone. The most important consequence of this
new attitude, or rather this new subordination to the cultural process, was that men
largely ceased to produce works of art. Moreover, intellectuals gradually withdrew from
the bustle of the world. Finally, and no less important -- indeed, the climax of the whole
development -- there arose the Glass Bead Game.
The growing profundity of musical science, which can already be observed soon
after 1900 when feuilletonism was still at its height, naturally exerted enormous influence
upon the beginnings of the Game. We, the heirs of musicology, believe we know more
about the music of the great creative centuries, especially the seventeenth and eighteenth,
and in a certain sense even understand it better than all previous epochs, including that of
classical music itself. As descendants, of course, our relation to classical music differs
totally from that of our predecessors in the creative ages. Our intellectualized veneration
for true music, all too frequently tainted by melancholic resignation, is a far cry from the
charming, simple-hearted delight in music-making of those days. We tend to envy those
happier times whenever our pleasure in their music makes us forget the conditions and
tribulations amid which it was begotten. Almost the entire twentieth century considered
philosophy, or else literature, to be the great lasting achievement of that cultural era
which lies between the end of the Middle Ages and modern times. We, however, have for
generations given the palm to mathematics and music. Ever since we have renounced --
on the whole, at any rate -- trying to vie creatively with those generations, ever since we
have also forsworn the worship of harmony in music-making, and of that purely sensuous
cult of dynamics -- a cult that dominated musical practices for a good two centuries after
the time of Beethoven and early Romanticism -- ever since then we have been able to
understand, more purely and more correctly, the general image of that culture whose
heirs we are. Or so we believe in our uncreative, retrospective, but reverent fashion! We
no longer have any of the exuberant fecundity of those days. For us it is almost
incomprehensible that musical style in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries could be
preserved for so long a time in unalloyed purity. How could it be, we ask, that among the
vast quantities of music written at that time we fail to find a trace of anything bad? How
could the eighteenth century, the time of incipient degeneration, still send hurtling into
the skies a fireworks display of styles, fashions, and schools, blazing briefly but with
such self-assurance? Nevertheless, we believe that we have uncovered the secret of what
we now call classical music, that we have understood the spirit, the virtue, and the piety
of those generations, and have taken all that as our model. Nowadays, for example, we do
not think much of the theology and the ecclesiastical culture of the eighteenth century, or
the philosophy of the Enlightenment; but we consider the cantatas, passions, and preludes
of Bach the ultimate quintessence of Christian culture.
Incidentally, there exists an ancient and honorable exemplar for the attitude of our
own culture toward music, a model to which the players of the Glass Bead Game look
back with great veneration. We recall that in the legendary China of the Old Kings, music
was accorded a dominant place in state and court. It was held that if music throve, all was
well with culture and morality and with the kingdom itself. The music masters were
required to be the strictest guardians of the original purity of the "venerable keys." If
music decayed, that was taken as a sure sign of the downfall of the regime and the state.
The poets told horrific fables about the forbidden, diabolic, heaven-offending keys, such
as the Tsing Shang key, and Tsing Tse, the "music of decline"; no sooner were these
wicked notes struck in the Royal Palace than the sky darkened, the walls trembled and
collapsed, and kingdom and sovereign went to their doom. We might quote many other
sayings by the ancient writers, but we shall cite here only a few passages from the chapter
on music in Lü Bu We's Spring and Autumn:
"The origins of music lie far back in the past. Music arises from Measure and is
rooted in the great Oneness. The great Oneness begets the two poles; the two poles beget
the power of Darkness and of Light.
"When the world is at peace, when all things are tranquil and all men obey their
superiors in all their courses, then music can be perfected. When desires and passions do
not turn into wrongful paths, music can be perfected. Perfect music has its cause. It arises
from equilibrium. Equilibrium arises from righteousness, and righteousness arises from
the meaning of the cosmos. Therefore one can speak about music only with a man who
has perceived the meaning of the cosmos.
"Music is founded on the harmony between heaven and earth, on the concord of
obscurity and brightness.
"Decaying states and men ripe for doom do not, of course, lack music either, but
their music is not serene. Therefore, the more tempestuous the music, the more doleful
are the people, the more imperiled the country, the more the sovereign declines. In this
way the essence of music is lost.
"What all sacred sovereigns have loved in music was its serenity. The tyrants
Giae and Jou Sin made tempestuous music. They thought loud sounds beautiful and
massed effects interesting. They strove for new and rare tonal effects, for notes which no
ear had ever heard hitherto. They sought to surpass each other, and overstepped all
bounds.
"The cause of the degeneration of the Chu state was its invention of magic music.
Such music is indeed tempestuous enough, but in truth it has departed from the essence of
music. Because it has departed from the essence of real music, this music is not serene. If
music is not serene, the people grumble and life is deranged. All this arises from
mistaking the nature of music and seeking only tempestuous tonal effects.
"Therefore the music of a well-ordered age is calm and cheerful, and so is its
government. The music of a restive age is excited and fierce, and its government is
perverted. The music of a decaying state is sentimental and sad, and its government is
imperiled."
The words of this Chinese writer point fairly distinctly to the origins and to the
real although almost forgotten meaning of all music. For in prehistoric times music, like
the dance and every other artistic endeavor, was a branch of magic, one of the old and
legitimate instruments of wonder-working. Beginning with rhythm (clapping of hands,
tramping, beating of sticks and primitive drums), it was a powerful, tried-and-true device
for putting large numbers of people "in tune" with one another, engendering the same
mood, co-ordinating the pace of their breathing and heartbeats, encouraging them to
invoke and conjure up the eternal powers, to dance, to compete, to make war, to worship.
And music has retained this original, pure, primordially powerful character, its magic, far
longer than the other arts. We need only recall the many testimonies of historians and
poets to the power of music, from the Greeks to Goethe in his Novelle. In practice,
marches and the dance have never lost their importance. . . But let us return to our
subject.
We shall now give a brief summary of the beginnings of the Glass Bead Game. It
appears to have arisen simultaneously in Germany and in England. In both countries,
moreover, it was originally a kind of exercise employed by those small groups of
musicologists and musicians who worked and studied in the new seminaries of musical
theory. If we compare the original state of the Game with its subsequent developments
and its present form, it is much like comparing a musical score of the period before 1500,
with its primitive notes and absence of bar lines, with an eighteenth-century score, let
alone with one from the nineteenth with its confusing excess of symbols for dynamics,
tempi, phrasing, and so on, which often made the printing of such scores a complex
technical problem.
The Game was at first nothing more than a witty method for developing memory
and ingenuity among students and musicians. And as we have said, it was played both in
England and Germany before it was "invented" here in the Musical Academy of Cologne,
and was given the name it bears to this day, after so many generations, although it has
long ceased to have anything to do with glass beads.
The inventor, Bastian Perrot of Calw, a rather eccentric but clever, sociable, and
humane musicologist, used glass beads instead of letters, numerals, notes, or other
graphic symbols. Perrot, who incidentally has also bequeathed to us a treatise on the
Apogee and Decline of Counterpoint, found that the pupils at the Cologne Seminary had
a rather elaborate game they used to play. One would call out, in the standardized
abbreviations of their science, motifs or initial bars of classical compositions, whereupon
the other had to respond with the continuation of the piece, or better still with a higher or
lower voice, a contrasting theme, and so forth. It was an exercise in memory and
improvisation quite similar to the sort of thing probably in vogue among ardent pupils of
counterpoint in the days of Schütz, Pachelbel, and Bach -- although it would then not
have been done in theoretical formulas, but in practice on the cembalo, lute, or flute, or
with the voice.
Bastian Perrot in all probability was a member of the Journeyers to the East. He
was partial to handicrafts and had himself built several pianos and clavichords in the
ancient style. Legend has it that he was adept at playing the violin in the old way,
forgotten since 1800, with a high-arched bow and hand-regulated tension of the bow
hairs. Given these interests, it was perhaps only natural that he should have constructed a
frame, modeled on a child's abacus, a frame with several dozen wires on which could be
strung glass beads of various sizes, shapes, and colors. The wires corresponded to the
lines of the musical staff, the beads to the time-values of the notes, and so on. In this way
he could represent with beads musical quotations or invented themes, could alter,
transpose, and develop them, change them and set them in counterpoint to one another. In
technical terms this was a mere plaything, but the pupils liked it; it was imitated and
became fashionable in England too. For a time the game of musical exercises was played
in this charmingly primitive manner. And as is so often the case, an enduring and
significant institution received its name from a passing and incidental circumstance. For
what later evolved out of that students' sport and Perrot's bead-strung wires bears to this
day the name by which it became popularly known, the Glass Bead Game.
A bare two or three decades later the Game seems to have lost some of its
popularity among students of music, but instead was taken over by mathematicians. For a
long while, indeed, a characteristic feature in the Game's history was that it was
constantly preferred, used, and further elaborated by whatever branch of learning
happened to be experiencing a period of high development or a renaissance. The
mathematicians brought the Game to a high degree of flexibility and capacity for
sublimation, so that it began to acquire something approaching a consciousness of itself
and its possibilities. This process paralleled the general evolution of cultural
consciousness, which had survived the great crisis and had, as Plinius Ziegenhalss puts it,
"with modest pride accepted the fate of belonging to a culture past its prime, as was the
case with the culture of late antiquity: Hellenistic culture in the Alexandrian Age."
So much for Ziegenhalss. We shall now attempt to sketch the further steps in the
history of the Glass Bead Game. Having passed from the musical to the mathematical
seminaries (a change which took place in France and England somewhat sooner than in
Germany), the Game was so far developed that it was capable of expressing mathematical
processes by special symbols and abbreviations. The players, mutually elaborating these
processes, threw these abstract formulas at one another, displaying the sequences and
possibilities of their science. This mathematical and astronomical game of formulas
required great attentiveness, keenness, and concentration. Among mathematicians, even
in those days, the reputation of being a good Glass Bead Game player meant a great deal;
it was equivalent to being a very good mathematician.
At various times the Game was taken up and imitated by nearly all the scientific
and scholarly disciplines, that is, adapted to the special fields. There is documented
evidence for its application to the fields of classical philology and logic. The analytical
study of musical values had led to the reduction of musical events to physical and
mathematical formulas. Soon afterward philology borrowed this method and began to
measure linguistic configurations as physics measures processes in nature. The visual arts
soon followed suit, architecture having already led the way in establishing the links
between visual art and mathematics. Thereafter more and more new relations, analogies,
and correspondences were discovered among the abstract formulas obtained in this way.
Each discipline which seized upon the Game created its own language of formulas,
abbreviations, and possible combinations. Everywhere, the elite intellectual youth
developed a passion for these Games, with their dialogues and progressions of formulas.
The Game was not mere practice and mere recreation; it became a form of concentrated
self-awareness for intellectuals. Mathematicians in particular played it with a virtuosity
and formal strictness at once athletic and ascetic. It afforded them a pleasure which
somewhat compensated for their renunciation of worldly pleasures and ambitions. For by
then such renunciation had already become a regular thing for intellectuals. The Glass
Bead Game contributed largely to the complete defeat of feuilletonism and to that newly
awakened delight in strict mental exercises to which we owe the origin of a new,
monastically austere intellectual discipline.
The world had changed. The life of the mind in the Age of the Feuilleton might be
compared to a degenerate plant which was squandering its strength in excessive
vegetative growth, and the subsequent corrections to pruning the plant back to the roots.
The young people who now proposed to devote themselves to intellectual studies no
longer took the term to mean attending a university and taking a nibble of this or that
from the dainties offered by celebrated and loquacious professors who without authority
offered them the crumbs of what had once been higher education. Now they had to study
just as stringently and methodically as the engineers and technicians of the past, if not
more so. They had a steep path to climb, had to purify and strengthen their minds by dint
of mathematics and scholastic exercises in Aristotelian philosophy. Moreover, they had
to learn to renounce all those benefits which previous generations of scholars had
considered worth striving for: rapid and easy money-making, celebrity and public honors,
the homage of the newspapers, marriages with daughters of bankers and industrialists, a
pampered and luxurious style of life. The writers with heavy sales, Nobel Prizes, and
lovely country houses, the celebrated physicians with decorations and liveried servants,
the professors with wealthy wives and brilliant salons, the chemists with posts on boards
of directors, the philosophers with feuilleton factories who delivered charming lectures in
overcrowded halls, for which they were rewarded with thunderous applause and floral
tributes -- all such public figures disappeared and have not come back to this day. Even
so, no doubt, there were still plenty of talented young people for whom such personages
were envied models. But the paths to honors, riches, fame, and luxury now no longer led
through lecture halls, academies, and doctoral theses. The deeply debased intellectual
professions were bankrupt in the world's eyes. But in compensation they had regained a
fanatical and penitential devotion to art and thought. Those talented persons whose
desires tended more toward glory or comfortable living had to turn their backs on the
intellectual life, which had become so austere, and seek out occupations which still
provided opportunities for comfort and money-making.
It would lead us too far afield to attempt to describe in detail how the world of
Mind, after its purification, won a place for itself in the State. Experience soon showed
that a few generations of lax and unscrupulous intellectual discipline had also sufficed to
inflict serious harm on practical life. Competence and responsibility had grown
increasingly rare in all the higher professions, including even those concerned with
technology. To remedy this, supervision of the things of the mind among the people and
in government came to be consigned more and more to the "intellectuals" in the best
sense of the word. This was particularly the case with the entire educational system; and
indeed the situation is little changed to this day. In almost all the countries of Europe
today the schools that are not still administered by the Roman Church are in the hands of
those anonymous Orders which fill their ranks from the elite among the intellectuals.
Although public opinion occasionally decries the strictness and the reputed arrogance of
this caste, and although individuals have occasionally revolted against it, this leadership
stands unshaken. Its integrity, its renunciation of all benefits and advantages other than
intellectual ones, maintains and protects it. But it is also supported by what has long since
become common knowledge, or at least a universal sense, that the continuance of
civilization depends on this strict schooling. People know, or dimly feel, that if thinking
is not kept pure and keen, and if respect for the world of the mind is no longer operative,
ships and automobiles will soon cease to run right, the engineer's slide rule and the
computations of banks and stock exchanges will forfeit validity and authority, and chaos
will ensue. It took long enough in all conscience for realization to come that the externals
of civilization -- technology, industry, commerce, and so on -- also require a common
basis of intellectual honesty and morality.
To return now to the Glass Bead Game: what it lacked in those days was the
capacity for universality, for rising above all the disciplines. The astronomers, the
classicists, the scholastics, the music students all played their Games according to their
ingenious rules, but the Game had a special language and set of rules for every discipline
and subdiscipline. It required half a century before the first step was taken toward
spanning these gulfs. The reason for this slowness was undoubtedly more moral than
formal and technical. The means for building the spans could even then have been found,
but along with the newly regenerated intellectual life went a puritanical shrinking from
"foolish digressions," from intermingling of disciplines and categories. There was also a
profound and justified fear of relapse into the sin of superficiality and feuilletonism.
It was the achievement of one individual which brought the Glass Bead Game
almost in one leap to an awareness of its potentialities, and thus to the verge of its
capacity for universal elaboration. And once again this advance was connected with
music. A Swiss musicologist with a passion for mathematics gave a new twist to the
Game, and thereby opened the way for its supreme development. This great man's name
in civil life can no longer be ascertained; by his time the cult of personality in intellectual
fields had already been dispensed with. He lives on in history as Lusor (or also,
Joculator) Basiliensis. Although his invention, like all inventions, was the product of his
own personal merit and grace, it in no way sprang solely from personal needs and
ambitions, but was impelled by a more powerful motive. There was a passionate craving
among all the intellectuals of his age for a means to express their new concepts. They
longed for philosophy, for synthesis. The erstwhile happiness of pure withdrawal each
into his own discipline was now felt to be inadequate. Here and there a scholar broke
through the barriers of his specialty and tried to advance into the terrain of universality.
Some dreamed of a new alphabet, a new language of symbols through which they could
formulate and exchange their new intellectual experiences.
Testimony to the strength of this impulse may be found in the essay "Chinese
Warning Cry," by a Parisian scholar of those years. The author, mocked by many in his
day as a sort of Don Quixote (incidentally, he was a distinguished scholar in the field of
Chinese philology), pointed out the dangers facing culture, in spite of its present
honorable condition, if it neglected to develop an international language of symbols. Such
a language, like the ancient Chinese script, should be able to express the most complex
matters graphically, without excluding individual imagination and inventiveness, in such
a way as to be understandable to all the scholars of the world. It was at this point that
Joculator Basiliensis applied himself to the problem. He invented for the Glass Bead
Game the principles of a new language, a language of symbols and formulas, in which
mathematics and music played an equal part, so that it became possible to combine
astronomical and musical formulas, to reduce mathematics and music to a common
denominator, as it were. Although what he did was by no means conclusive, this
unknown man from Basel certainly laid the foundations for all that came later in the
history of our beloved Game.
The Glass Bead Game, formerly the specialized entertainment of mathematicians
in one era, philologists or musicians in another era, now more and more cast its spell
upon all true intellectuals. Many an old university, many a lodge, and especially the ageold League of Journeyers to the East, turned to it. Some of the Catholic Orders likewise
scented a new intellectual atmosphere and yielded to its lure. At some Benedictine abbeys
the monks devoted themselves to the Game so intensely that even in those early days the
question was hotly debated -- it was subsequently to crop up again now and then --
whether this game ought to be tolerated, supported, or forbidden by Church and Curia.
After Joculator Basiliensis' grand accomplishment, the Game rapidly evolved into
what it is today: the quintessence of intellectuality and art, the sublime cult, the unio
mystica of all separate members of the Universitas Litterarum. In our lives it has partially
taken over the role of art, partially that of speculative philosophy. Indeed, in the days of
Plinius Ziegenhalss, for instance, it was often called by a different name, one common in
the literature of the Feuilletonistic Age. That name, which for many a prophetic spirit in
those days embodied a visionary ideal, was: Magic Theater.
For all that the Glass Bead Game had grown infinitely in technique and range
since its beginnings, for all the intellectual demands it made upon its players, and for all
that it had become a sublime art and science, in the days of Joculator Basiliensis it still
was lacking in an essential element. Up to that time every game had been a serial
arrangement, an ordering, grouping, and confronting of concentrated concepts from many
fields of thought and aesthetics, a rapid recollection of eternal values and forms, a brief,
virtuoso flight through the realms of the mind. Only after some time did there enter into
the Game, from the intellectual stock of the educational system and especially from the
habits and customs of the Joumeyers to the East, the idea of contemplation.
This new element arose out of an observed evil. Mnemonists, people with freakish
memories and no other virtues, were capable of playing dazzling games, dismaying and
confusing the other participants by their rapid muster of countless ideas. In the course of
time such displays of virtuosity fell more and more under a strict ban, and contemplation
became a highly important component of the Game. Ultimately, for the audiences at each
Game it became the main thing. This was the necessary turning toward the religious
spirit. What had formerly mattered was following the sequences of ideas and the whole
intellectual mosaic of a Game with rapid attentiveness, practiced memory, and full
understanding. But there now arose the demand for a deeper and more spiritual approach.
After each symbol conjured up by the director of a Game, each player was required to
perform silent, formal meditation on the content, origin, and meaning of this symbol, to
call to mind intensively and organically its full purport. The members of the Order and of
the Game associations brought the technique and practice of contemplation with them
from their elite schools, where the art of contemplation and meditation was nurtured with
the greatest care. In this way the hieroglyphs of the Game were kept from degenerating
into mere empty signs.
Hitherto, by the way, the Glass Bead Game, in spite of its popularity among
scholars, had remained a purely private form of exercise. It could be played alone, by
pairs, or by many, although unusually brilliant, well-composed, and successful Games
were sometimes written down and circulated from city to city and country to country for
admiration or criticism. Now, however, the Game slowly began to be enriched by a new
function, for it became a public ceremonial. To this day everyone is free to play the Game
privately, and young people are especially fond of doing so. But nowadays virtually
everyone associates the Glass Bead Game with ceremonial public Games. They take
place under the leadership of a few superior Masters who are directly subordinate to the
Ludi Magister, or Master of the Game, of their country, with invited guests listening
raptly, and a wider audience all over the world following with closest attention. Some of
these Games last for days and weeks, and while such a Game is being celebrated all the
players and guests -- obeying precepts which even govern the length of time they are
allowed to sleep -- live an ascetic and selfless life of absolute absorption, comparable to
the strictly regulated penitence required of the participants in one of St. Ignatius Loyola's
exercises.
There is scarcely any more we need add. Under the shifting hegemony of now
this, now that science or art, the Game of games had developed into a kind of universal
language through which the players could express values and set these in relation to one
another. Throughout its history the Game was closely allied with music, and usually
proceeded according to musical or mathematical rules. One theme, two themes, or three
themes were stated, elaborated, varied, and underwent a development quite similar to that
of the theme in a Bach fugue or a concerto movement. A Game, for example, might start
from a given astronomical configuration, or from the actual theme of a Bach fugue, or
from a sentence out of Leibniz or the Upanishads, and from this theme, depending on the
intentions and talents of the player, it could either further explore and elaborate the initial
motif or else enrich its expressiveness by allusions to kindred concepts. Beginners
learned how to establish parallels, by means of the Game's symbols, between a piece of
classical music and the formula for some law of nature. Experts and Masters of the Game
freely wove the initial theme into unlimited combinations. For a long time one school of
players favored the technique of stating side by side, developing in counterpoint, and
finally harmoniously combining two hostile themes or ideas, such as law and freedom,
individual and community. In such a Game the goal was to develop both themes or theses
with complete equality and impartiality, to evolve out of thesis and antithesis the purest
possible synthesis. In general, aside from certain brilliant exceptions, Games with
discordant, negative, or skeptical conclusions were unpopular and at times actually
forbidden. This followed directly from the meaning the Game had acquired at its height
for the players. It represented an elite, symbolic form of seeking for perfection, a sublime
alchemy, an approach to that Mind which beyond all images and multiplicities is one
within itself -- in other words, to God. Pious thinkers of earlier times had represented the
life of creatures, say, as a mode of motion toward God, and had considered that the
variety of the phenomenal world reached perfection and ultimate cognition only in the
divine Unity. Similarly, the symbols and formulas of the Glass Bead Game combined
structurally, musically, and philosophically within the framework of a universal
language, were nourished by all the sciences and arts, and strove in play to achieve
perfection, pure being, the fullness of reality. Thus, "realizing" was a favorite expression
among the players. They considered their Games a path from Becoming to Being, from
potentiality to reality. We would like to remind the reader once again of the sentences
quoted above from Nicholas of Cues.
Incidentally, the terminology of Christian theology, or at any rate that part of it
which seemed to have become a part of the general cultural heritage, was naturally
absorbed into the symbolic language of the Game. Thus one of the principles of the
Creed, a passage from the Bible, a phrase from one of the Church Fathers, or from the
Latin text of the Mass could be expressed and taken into the Game just as easily and aptly
as an axiom of geometry or a melody of Mozart. We would scarcely be exaggerating if
we ventured to say that for the small circle of genuine Glass Bead Game players the
Game was virtually equivalent to worship, although it deliberately eschewed developing
any theology of its own.
In struggling for their continued existence in the midst of soulless world powers,
both the Glass Bead Game players and the Roman Church had become too dependent
upon each other for either to permit a decisive confrontation between them, although that
danger was always present, since the intellectual honesty and the authentic impulse to
reach incisive, unequivocal formulations drove the partisans of both toward a parting of
the ways. That parting, however, never took place. Rome vacillated between a benevolent
and a hostile attitude toward the Game, for a good many of the most talented persons in
the Roman congregations, and in the ranks of the high and the highest clergy, were
players. And the Game itself, ever since public matches and a Ludi Magister had been
instituted, enjoyed the protection of the Order and of the education ministries, both of
which always behaved with the greatest possible courtesy and chivalry toward Rome.
Pope Pius XV, who as a cardinal had been an excellent and ardent Glass Bead Game
player, as pontiff followed the example of all his predecessors in bidding the Game
farewell forever; but he went a step further and actually attempted to put the Game on
trial. It was a near thing; had he carried out his intention, Catholics would have been
forbidden to play the Game. But the pope died before matters came to that point, and a
widely read biography of this rather important man has represented his attitude toward
the Glass Bead Game as one of deep passion which in his pontifical office he could vent
only in the form of hostility.
The Game had been played freely by individuals and cliques, and for a long time
amiably promoted by the ministries of education, before it acquired the status of a public
institution. It was first organized as such in France and England; other countries followed
fairly rapidly. In each country a Game Commission and a supreme head of the Game,
bearing the title of Ludi Magister, were established. Official matches, played under the
personal direction of the Magister, were exalted into cultural festivals. Like all high
functionaries in cultural life, the Magister of course remained anonymous. Aside from a
few intimates, no one knew his name. Official and international communications media,
such as radio and so on, were made available only for the great official matches over
which the Ludi Magister personally presided. Among the duties of the Magister, in
addition to conducting the public Games, was supervision of the players and the schools
of the Game. Above all, however, the Magister had to keep strict watch over the further
elaboration of the Game. The World Commission of the Magisters of all countries alone
decided on the acceptance of new symbols and formulas into the existing stock of the
Game (which scarcely ever occurs nowadays), on modifications of the rules, on the
desirability of including new fields within the purview of the Game. If the Game is
regarded as a kind of world language for thoughtful men, the Games Commissions of the
various countries under the leadership of their Magisters form as a whole the Academy
which guards the vocabulary, the development, and the purity of this language. Each
country's Commission possesses its Archive of the Game, that is, the register of all
hitherto examined and accepted symbols and decipherments, whose number long ago by
far exceeded the number of the ancient Chinese ideographs.
In general, a passing grade in the final examination in one of the academies,
especially one of the elite schools, is considered sufficient qualification for a Glass Bead
Game player; but in the past and to this day superior competence in one of the principal
fields of scholarship or in music is tacitly assumed. To rise some day to membership in
one of the Games Commissions, or even to Ludi Magister, is the dream of almost every
fifteen-year-old in the elite schools. But by the time these youth have become doctoral
candidates, only a tiny percentage still seriously cling to their ambition to serve the Glass
Bead Game and take an active part in its further development. On the other hand, all
these lovers of the Game diligently study the lore of the Game and practice meditation.
At the "great" Games they form that innermost ring of reverent and devoted participants
which gives the public matches their ceremonial character and keeps them from
devolving into mere aesthetic displays. To these real players and devotees, the Ludi
Magister is a prince or high priest, almost a deity.
But for every independent player, and especially for the Magister, the Glass Bead
Game is primarily a form of music-making, somewhat in the sense of those words that
Joseph Knecht once spoke concerning the nature of classical music:
"We consider classical music to be the epitome and quintessence of our culture,
because it is that culture's clearest, most significant gesture and expression. In this music
we possess the heritage of classical antiquity and Christianity, a spirit of serenely cheerful
and brave piety, a superbly chivalric morality. For in the final analysis every important
cultural gesture comes down to a morality, a model for human behavior concentrated into
a gesture. As we know, between 1500 and 1800 a wide variety of music was made; styles
and means of expression were extremely variegated; but the spirit, or rather the morality,
was everywhere the same. The human attitude of which classical music is the expression
is always the same; it is always based on the same kind of insight into life and strives for
the same kind of victory over blind chance. Classical music as gesture signifies
knowledge of the tragedy of the human condition, affirmation of human destiny, courage,
cheerful serenity. The grace of a minuet by Handel or Couperin, the sensuality
sublimated into delicate gesture to be found in many Italian composers or in Mozart, the
tranquil, composed readiness for death in Bach -- always there may be heard in these
works a defiance, a death-defying intrepidity, a gallantry, and a note of superhuman
laughter, of immortal gay serenity. Let that same note also sound in our Glass Bead
Games, and in our whole lives, acts, and sufferings."
These words were noted down by one of Knecht's pupils. With them we bring to
an end our consideration of the Glass Bead Game.
THE
LIFE
OF
MAGISTER
LUDI
JOSEPH
KNECHT
ONE
THE CALL
No KNOWLEDGE HAS come down to us of Joseph Knecht's origins. Like many other
pupils of the elite schools, he either lost his parents early in childhood, or the Board of
Educators removed him from unfavorable home conditions and took charge of him. In
any case, he was spared the conflict between elite school and home which complicates
the youth of many other boys of his type, makes entry into the Order more difficult, and
in some cases transforms highly gifted young people into problem personalities.
Knecht was one of those fortunates who seem born for Castalia, for the Order, and
for service in the Board of Educators. Although he was not spared the perplexities of the
life of the mind, it was given to him to experience without personal bitterness the tragedy
inherent in every life consecrated to thought. Indeed, it is probably not so much this
tragedy in itself that has tempted us to delve so deeply into the personality of Joseph
Knecht; rather, it was the tranquil, cheerful, not to say radiant manner in which he
brought his destiny and his talents to fruition. Like every man of importance he had his
daimonion and his amor fati; but in him amor fati manifests itself to us free of
somberness and fanaticism. Granted, there is always much that is hidden, and we must
not forget that the writing of history -- however dryly it is done and however sincere the
desire for objectivity -- remains literature. History's third dimension is always fiction.
Thus, to select some examples of greatness, we have no idea whether Johann
Sebastian Bach or Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart actually lived in a cheerful or a
despondent manner. Mozart moves us with that peculiarly touching and endearing grace
of early blossoming and fading; Bach stands for the edifying and comforting submission
to God's paternal plan of which suffering and dying form a part. But we do not really read
these qualities from their biographies and from such facts about their private lives as have
come down to us; we read them solely from their works, from their music. Furthermore,
although we know Bach's biography and deduce his personality from his music, we
involuntarily include his posthumous destiny in the picture. We conceive him as living
with the knowledge, which causes him a silent smile, that all his work would be forgotten
after his death, that his manuscripts would be treated as so much waste paper, that one of
his sons instead of himself would be considered "the great Bach," and harvest the success
he himself merited, and that after his work had been rediscovered it would be plunged
into the misunderstandings and barbarities of the Age of the Feuilleton, and so on.
Similarly, we tend to ascribe to Mozart, while still alive and flourishing, and producing
his soundest work, some knowledge of his security in the hands of death, some
premonition of the kindness with which death would embrace him. Where a body of
work exists, the historian cannot help himself; he must sum it up, along with the life of
the creator of that work, as two inseparable halves of a living unity. So we do with
Mozart or with Bach; so we also do with Knecht, although he belongs to our essentially
uncreative era and has not left behind any body of work of the same nature as those
masters.
In attempting to trace the course of Knecht's life we are also attempting to
interpret it, and although as historians we must deeply regret the scantiness of
authenticated information on the last period of his life, we were nevertheless encouraged
to undertake the task precisely because this last part of Knecht's life has become a legend.
We have taken over this legend and adhere to its spirit, whether or not it is merely a pious
fiction. Just as we know nothing about Knecht's birth and origins, we know nothing about
his death. But we have not the slightest reason for assuming that this death could have
been a matter of pure chance. We regard his life, insofar as it is known, as built up in a
clear succession of stages; and if in our speculations about its end we gladly accept the
legend and faithfully report it, we do so because what the legend tells us about the last
stage of his life seems to correspond fully with the previous stages. We go so far as to
admit that the manner in which his life drifts gently off into legend appears to us organic
and right, just as it imposes no strain on our credulity to believe in the continued
existence of a constellation that has vanished below the horizon. Within the world in
which we live -- and by we I mean the author of this present work and the reader --
Joseph Knecht reached the summit and achieved the maximum. As Magister Ludi he
became the leader and prototype of all those who strive toward and cultivate the things of
the mind. He administered and increased the cultural heritage that had been handed down
to him, for he was high priest of a temple that is sacred to each and every one of us. But
he did more than attain the realm of a Master, did more than fill the office at the very
summit of our hierarchy. He moved on beyond it; he grew out of it into a dimension
whose nature we can only reverently guess at. And for that very reason it seems to us
perfectly appropriate, and in keeping with his life, that his biography should also have
surpassed the usual dimensions and at the end passed on into legend. We accept the
miracle of this fact and rejoice in it without any inclination to pry into it interpretively.
But insofar as Knecht's life is historical -- and it is that up to one specific day -- we intend
to treat it as such. It has been our endeavor, therefore, to transmit the tradition exactly as
it has been revealed to us by our researches.
Concerning his childhood before he entered the elite schools, we know only a
single incident. It is, however, one of symbolic importance, for it signifies the first great
call of the realm of Mind to him, the voice of his vocation. And it is characteristic that
this first call came not from science or scholarship, but from music. We owe this
fragment of biography, as we do almost all the recollections of Knecht's personal life, to
the jottings of a pupil of the Glass Bead Game, a loyal admirer who kept a record of
many of the remarks and stories of his great teacher.
Knecht must have been twelve or thirteen years old at the time. For quite a while
he had been a scholarship pupil in the Latin school of Berolfingen, a small town on the
fringes of the Zaberwald. Probably Berolfingen was also his birthplace. His teachers at
the school, and especially his music teacher, had already recommended him two or three
times to the highest Board for admission into the elite schools. But Knecht knew nothing
about this and had as yet had no encounters with the elite or with any of the masters of
the highest Board of Educators. His music teacher, from whom he was learning violin
and the lute, told him that the Music Master would shortly be coming to Berolfingen to
inspect music instruction at the school. Therefore Joseph must practice like a good boy
and not embarrass his teacher.
The news stirred the boy deeply, for of course he knew quite well who the Music
Master was. He was not to be compared with the school inspectors who visited twice a
year, coming from somewhere in the higher reaches of the Board of Educators. The
Music Master was one of the twelve demigods, one of the twelve supreme heads of this
most respected of Boards. In all musical affairs he was the supreme authority for the
entire country. To think that the Music Master himself, the Magister Musicae in person,
would be coming to Berolfingen! There was only one person in the world whom Joseph
might have regarded as still more legendary and mysterious: the Master of the Glass Bead
Game.
Joseph was filled in advance with an enormous and timorous reverence for the
impending visitor. He imagined the Music Master variously as a king, as one of the
Twelve Apostles, or as one of the legendary great artists of classical times, a Michael
Praetorius or a Claudio Monteverdi, a J. J. Froberger or Johann Sebastian Bach. And he
looked forward with a joy as deep as his terror to the appearance of this mighty star. That
one of the demigods and archangels, one of the mysterious and almighty regents of the
world of thought, was to appear in the flesh here in town and in the Latin school; that he
was going to see him, and that the Master might possibly speak to him, examine him,
reprimand or praise him, was a kind of miracle and rare prodigy in the skies. Moreover,
as the teachers assured him, this was to be the first time in decades that a Magister
Musicae in person would be visiting the town and the little Latin school. The boy
pictured the forthcoming event in a great variety of ways. Above all he imagined a great
public festival and a reception such as he had once experienced when a new mayor had
taken office, with brass bands and streets strung with banners; there might even be
fireworks. Knecht's schoolmates also had such fantasies and hopes. His happy excitement
was subdued only by the thought that he himself might come too close to this great man,
and that his playing and his answers might be so bad that he would end up unbearably
disgraced. But this anxiety was sweet as well as tormenting. Secretly, without admitting it
to himself, he did not think the whole eagerly anticipated festival with its flags and
fireworks nearly so fine, so entrancing, important, and miraculously delightful as the very
possibility that he, little Joseph Knecht, would be seeing this man at close quarters, that in
fact the Master was paying this visit to Berolfingen just a little on his, Joseph's, account --
for he was after all coming to examine the state of musical instruction, and the music
teacher obviously thought it possible that the Master would examine him as well.
But perhaps it would not come to that -- alas, it probably would not. After all, it
was hardly possible. The Master would have better things to do than to listen to a small
boy's violin playing. He would probably want to see and hear only the older, more
advanced pupils.
Such were the boy's thoughts as he awaited the day. And the day, when it came,
began with a disappointment. No music blared in the streets, no flags and garlands hung
from the houses. As on every other day, Joseph had to gather up his books and notebooks
and go to the ordinary classes. And even in the classroom there was not the slightest sign
of decoration or festivity. Everything was ordinary and normal. Class began; the teacher
wore his everyday smock; he made no speeches, did not so much as mention the great
guest of honor.
But during the second or third hour the guest came nevertheless. There was a
knock at the door; the school janitor came in and informed the teacher that Joseph Knecht
was to present himself to the music teacher in fifteen minutes. And he had better make
sure that his hair was decently combed and his hands and fingernails clean.
Knecht turned pale with fright. He stumbled from the classroom, ran to the
dormitory, put down his books, washed and combed his hair. Trembling, he took his
violin case and his book of exercises. With a lump in his throat, he made his way to the
music rooms in the annex. An excited schoolmate met him on the stairs, pointed to a
practice room, and told him: "You're supposed to wait here till they call you."
The wait was short, but seemed to him an eternity. No one called him, but a man
entered the room. A very old man, it seemed to him at first, not very tall, white-haired,
with a fine, clear face and penetrating, light-blue eyes. The gaze of those eyes might have
been frightening, but they were serenely cheerful as well as penetrating, neither laughing
nor smiling, but filled with a calm, quietly radiant cheerfulness. He shook hands with the
boy, nodded, and sat down with deliberation on the stool in front of the old practice
piano. "You are Joseph Knecht?" he said. "Your teacher seems content with you. I think
he is fond of you. Come, let's make a little music together."
Knecht had already taken out his violin. The old man struck the A, and the boy
tuned. Then he looked inquiringly, anxiously, at the Music Master.
"What would you like to play?" the Master asked.
The boy could not say a word. He was filled to the brim with awe of the old man.
Never had he seen a person like this. Hesitantly, he picked up his exercise book and held
it out to the Master.
"No," the Master said, "I want you to play from memory, and not an exercise but
something easy that you know by heart. Perhaps a song you like."
Knecht was confused, and so enchanted by this face and those eyes that he could
not answer. He was deeply ashamed of his confusion, but unable to speak. The Master
did not insist. With one finger, he struck the first notes of a melody, and looked
questioningly at the boy. Joseph nodded and at once played the melody with pleasure. It
was one of the old songs which were often sung in school.
"Once more," the Master said.
Knecht repeated the melody, and the old man now played a second voice to go
with it. Now the old song rang through the small practice room in two parts.
"Once more."
Knecht played, and the Master played the second part, and a third part also. Now
the beautiful old song rang through the room in three parts.
"Once more." And the Master played three voices along with the melody.
"A lovely song," the Master said softly. "Play it again, in the alto this time."
The Master gave him the first note, and Knecht played, the Master accompanying
with the other three voices. Again and again the Master said, "Once more," and each time
he sounded merrier. Knecht played the melody in the tenor, each time accompanied by
two or three parts. They played the song many times, and with every repetition the song
was involuntarily enriched with embellishments and variations. The bare little room
resounded festively in the cheerful light of the forenoon.
After a while the old man stopped. "Is that enough?" he asked. Knecht shook his
head and began again. The Master chimed in gaily with his three voices, and the four
parts drew their thin, lucid lines, spoke to one another, mutually supported, crossed, and
wove around one another in delightful windings and figurations. The boy and the old man
ceased to think of anything else; they surrendered themselves to the lovely, congenial
lines and figurations they formed as their parts crisscrossed. Caught in the network their
music was creating, they swayed gently along with it, obeying an unseen conductor.
Finally, when the melody had come to an end once more, the Master turned his head and
asked: "Did you like that, Joseph?"
Gratefully, his face glowing, Knecht looked at him. He was radiant, but still
speechless.
"Do you happen to know what a fugue is?" the Master now asked.
Knecht looked dubious. He had already heard fugues, but had not yet studied
them in class.
"Very well," the Master said, "then I'll show you. You'll grasp it quicker if we
make a fugue ourselves. Now then, the first thing we need for a fugue is a theme, and we
don't have to look far for the theme. We'll take it from our song."
He played a brief phrase, a fragment of the song's melody. It sounded strange, cut
out in that way, without head or tail. He played the theme once more, and this time he
went on to the first entrance; the second entrance changed the interval of a fifth to a
fourth; the third repeated the first an octave higher, as did the fourth with the second. The
exposition concluded with a cadence in the key of the dominant. The second working-out
modulated more freely to other keys; the third, tending toward the subdominant, ended
with a cadence on the tonic.
The boy looked at the player's clever white fingers, saw the course of the
development faintly mirrored in his concentrated expression, while his eyes remained
quiet under half-closed lids. Joseph's heart swelled with veneration, with love for the
Master. His ear drank in the fugue; it seemed to him that he was hearing music for the
first time in his life. Behind the music being created in his presence he sensed the world
of Mind, the joy-giving harmony of law and freedom, of service and rule. He surrendered
himself, and vowed to serve that world and this Master. In those few minutes he saw
himself and his life, saw the whole cosmos guided, ordered, and interpreted by the spirit
of music. And when the playing had come to an end, he saw this magician and king for
whom he felt so intense a reverence pause for a little while longer, slightly bowed over
the keys, with half-closed eyes, his face softly glowing from within. Joseph did not know
whether he ought to rejoice at the bliss of this moment, or weep because it was over.
The old man slowly raised himself from the piano stool, fixed those cheerful blue
eyes piercingly and at the same time with unimaginable friendliness upon him, and said:
"Making music together is the best way for two people to become friends. There is none
easier. That is a fine thing. I hope you and I shall remain friends. Perhaps you too will
learn how to make fugues, Joseph."
He shook hands with Joseph and took his leave. But in the doorway he turned
once more and gave Joseph a parting greeting, with a look and a ceremonious little
inclination of his head.
Many years later Knecht told his pupil that when he stepped out of the building,
he found the town and the world far more transformed and enchanted than if there had
been flags, garlands, and streamers, or displays of fireworks. He had experienced his
vocation, which may surely be spoken of as a sacrament. The ideal world, which hitherto
his young soul had known only by hearsay and in wild dreams, had suddenly taken on
visible lineaments for him. Its gates had opened invitingly. This world, he now saw, did
not exist only in some vague, remote past or future; it was here and was active; it glowed,
sent messengers, apostles, ambassadors, men like this old Magister (who by the way was
not nearly so old as he then seemed to Joseph). And through this venerable messenger an
admonition and a call had come from that world even to him, the insignificant Latin
school pupil.
Such was the meaning of the experience for him. It took weeks before he actually
realized, and was convinced, that the magical events of that sacramental hour
corresponded to a precise event in the real world, that the summons was not just a sense
of happiness and admonition in his own soul and his own conscience, but a show of favor
and an exhortation from the earthly powers. For in the long run it could not be concealed
that the Music Master's visit had been neither a matter of chance nor a real inspection of
the school. Rather, Knecht's name had stood for some time on the lists of pupils who
seemed deserving of education in the elite school. At any rate, on the basis of his
teachers' reports he had been so recommended to the Board of Educators. The boy had
been recommended for good character and as a Latinist, but the highest praise had come
from his music teacher. Therefore the Music Master had chosen to stop off for a few
hours in Berolfingen, in the course of an official mission, in order to see this pupil. In his
examination he was not so much interested in Joseph's Latin or his fingering (in these
matters he relied on the teachers' reports, which he nevertheless spent an hour going over)
as whether the boy had it in him by nature to become a musician in the higher sense of
the word, whether he had the capacity for enthusiasm, subordination, reverence,
worshipful service. As a rule, and for very good reasons, the teachers in the public
schools were anything but liberal in their recommendations of pupils for the "elite."
Nevertheless, now and then someone would be pushed out of more or less unsavory
motives. Quite often, too, from sheer lack of insight a teacher would stubbornly
recommend some pet pupil who had few virtues aside from diligence, ambition, and a
certain shrewdness in his conduct toward the teachers. The Music Master particularly
disliked this kind of boy. He could tell at once whether a pupil was aware that his future
career was at stake, and woe to the boy who approached him too adroitly, too cannily, too
cleverly, let alone one who tried to flatter him. In a good many cases such candidates
were rejected without even an examination.
Knecht, on the other hand, had delighted the old Music Master. He had liked him
very much. As he continued his journey he recalled the boy with pleasure. He had made
no notes and entered no marks for him in his notebook, but he took with him the memory
of the unspoiled, modest boy, and upon his return he inscribed his name in his own hand
on the list of pupils who had been examined personally by a member of the Board of
Educators and been found worthy of admission.
Joseph had occasionally heard talk in school about this list, and in a great variety
of tones. The pupils called it "the golden book," but sometimes they disrespectfully
referred to it as the "climbers' catalogue." Whenever a teacher mentioned the list -- if only
to remind a pupil that a lout like him could never hope to win a place on it -- there would
be a note of solemnity, of respect, and also of self-importance in his voice. But if the
pupils mentioned the catalogue, they usually spoke in a jeering tone and with somewhat
exaggerated indifference. Once Joseph had heard a schoolmate say: "Go on, what do I
care about that stupid climbers' catalogue. You won't see a regular feller's name on it,
that's one sure thing. The teachers keep it for all the worst grinds and creeps."
A curious period followed Joseph's wonderful experience with the Music Master.
He still did not know that he now belonged to the electi, to the flos juventutis, as the elite
pupils were called in the Order. At first it did not enter his mind that there might be
practical consequences and tangible effects of the episode upon his general destiny or his
daily life. While for his teachers he was already marked by distinction and on the verge
of departure, he himself was conscious of his call almost entirely as a process within
himself. Even so, it made a clear dividing line in his life. Although the hour with the
sorcerer (as he often thought of the Music Master) had only brought to fruition, or
brought closer, something he had already sensed in his own heart, that hour nevertheless
clearly separated the past from the present and the future -- just as an awakened dreamer,
even if he wakes up in the same surroundings that he has seen in his dream, cannot really
doubt that he is now awake. There are many types and kinds of vocation, but the core of
the experience is always the same: the soul is awakened by it, transformed or exalted, so
that instead of dreams and presentiments from within a summons comes from without. A
portion of reality presents itself and makes its claim.
In this case the portion of reality had been the Music Master. This remote,
venerated demigod, this archangel from the highest spheres of heaven, had appeared in
the flesh. Joseph had seen his omniscient blue eyes. He had sat on the stool at the practice
piano, had made music with Joseph, made music wonderfully; almost without words he
had shown him what music really was, had blessed him, and vanished.
For the present Joseph was incapable of reflecting on possible practical
consequences, on all that might flow out of this event, for he was much too preoccupied
with the immediate reverberations of it within himself. Like a young plant hitherto
quietly and intermittently developing which suddenly begins to breathe harder and to
grow, as though in a miraculous hour it has become aware of the law which shapes it and
begins to strive toward the fulfillment of its being, the boy, touched by the magician's
hand, began rapidly and eagerly to gather and tauten his energies. He felt changed,
growing; he felt new tensions and new harmonies between himself and the world. There
were times, now, in music, Latin, and mathematics, when he could master tasks that were
still far beyond his age and the scope of his schoolmates. Sometimes he felt capable of
any achievements. At other times he might forget everything and daydream with a new
softness and surrender, listen to the wind or the rain, gaze into the chalice of a flower or
the moving waters of the river, understanding nothing, divining everything, lost in
sympathy, curiosity, the craving to comprehend, carried away from his own self toward
another, toward the world, toward the mystery and sacrament, the at once painful and
lovely disporting of the world of appearances.
Thus, beginning from within and growing toward the meeting and confirmation of
self and world, the vocation of Joseph Knecht developed in perfect purity. He passed
through all its stages, tasted all its joys and anxieties. Unhampered by sudden revelations
and indiscretions, the sublime process moved to its conclusion. His was the typical
evolution of every noble mind; working and growing harmoniously and at the same
tempo, the inner self and the outer world approached each other. At the end of these
developments the boy became aware of his situation and of the fate that awaited him. He
realized that his teachers were treating him like a colleague, even like a guest of honor
whose departure is expected at any moment, and that his schoolmates were half admiring
or envying him, half avoiding or even distrusting him. Some of his enemies now openly
mocked and hated him, and he found himself more and more separated from and deserted
by former friends. But by then the same process of separation and isolation had been
completed within himself. His own feelings had taught him to regard the teachers more
and more as associates rather than superiors; his former friends had become temporary
companions of the road, now left behind. He no longer felt that he was among equals in
his school and his town. He was no longer in the right place. Everything he had known
had become permeated by a hidden death, a solvent of unreality, a sense of belonging to
the past. It had all become a makeshift, like worn-out clothing that no longer fitted. And
as the end of his stay at the Latin school approached, this slow outgrowing of a beloved
and harmonious home town, this shedding of a way of life no longer right for him, this
living on the verge of departure -- interspersed though the mood of parting was by
moments of supreme rejoicing and radiant self-assurance -- became a terrible torment to
him, an almost intolerable pressure and suffering. For everything was slipping from him
without his being sure that it was not really himself who was abandoning everything. He
could not say whether he should not be blaming himself for this perishing and
estrangement of his dear and accustomed world. Perhaps he had killed it by ambition, by
arrogance, by pride, by disloyalty and lack of love. Among the pangs inherent in a
genuine vocation, these are the bitterest. One who has received the call takes, in
accepting it, not only a gift and a commandment, but also something akin to guilt.
Similarly, the soldier who is snatched from the ranks of his comrades and raised to the
status of officer is the worthier of promotion, the more he pays for it with a feeling of
guilty conscience toward his comrades.
Joseph Knecht, however, had the good fortune to go through this evolution
undisturbed and in utter innocence. When at last the faculty informed him of his
distinction and his impending admission to the elite schools, he was for the moment
completely surprised, although a moment later this novelty seemed to him something he
had long known and been expecting. Yet only now did he recall that for weeks the word
electus, or "elite boy," had now and again been sneeringly called out behind his back. He
had heard it, but only half heard, and had never imagined it as anything but a taunt. He
had taken it to mean not that his schoolmates were actually calling him an electus, but
that they were jeering: "You're so stuck up you think you're an electus." Occasionally he
had suffered from the gulf that had opened between himself and his schoolmates, but in
fact he would never have considered himself an electus. He had become conscious of the
call not as a rise in rank, but only as an inward admonition and encouragement. And yet
-- in spite of everything, had he not known it all along, divined it, felt it again and again?
Now it had come; his raptures were confirmed, made legitimate; his suffering had had
meaning; the clothing he had worn, by now unbearably old and too tight, could be
discarded at last. A new suit was waiting for him.
With his admission into the elite, Knecht's life was transferred to a different plane.
The first and decisive step in his development had been taken. It is by no means the rule
for all elite pupils that official admission to the elite coincides with the inner experience
of vocation. That is a matter of grace, or to put it in banal terms, sheer good fortune. The
young man to whom it does happen starts out with an advantage, just as it is an advantage
to be endowed with felicitous qualities of body and soul. Almost all elite pupils regard
their election as a piece of great good fortune, a distinction they are proud of, and a great
many of them have previously felt an ardent longing for that distinction. But for most of
the elect the transition from the ordinary schools of their home towns to the schools of
Castalia comes harder than they had imagined, and entails a good many unexpected
disappointments. Especially for pupils who were happy and loved in their homes, the
change represents a very difficult parting and renunciation. The result is a rather
considerable number of transfers back home, especially during the first two elite years.
The reason for these is not a lack of talent and industry, but the inability of the pupils to
adapt to boarding-school life and to the idea of more and more severing their ties to
family and home until ultimately they would cease to know and to respect any allegiance
other than to the Order.
On the other hand, there were occasionally pupils for whom admission to the elite
schools meant above all freedom from home or an oppressive school, from an oversevere
father, say, or a disagreeable teacher. These youngsters breathed easier for a while, but
they had expected such vast and impossible changes in their whole life that
disillusionment soon followed.
The real climbers and model pupils, the young pedants, could also not always
hold their own in Castalia. Not that they would have been unable to cope with their
studies. But in the elite, studies and marks were not the only criterion. There were other
pedagogical and artistic goals which sometimes proved too much for such pupils.
Nevertheless, within the system of four great elite schools with their numerous
subdivisions and branch institutions there was room for a great variety of talents, and an
aspiring mathematician or a student of languages and literatures, if he really had the
makings of a scholar, would not be misprized for a lack of musical or philosophical
talent. Even in Castalia, in fact, there were at times very strong tendencies toward
cultivation of the pure, sober disciplines, and the advocates of such tendencies not only
denigrated the "visionaries," that is, the devotees of music and the other arts, but even
sometimes went so far as to forswear and ban, within their own circle, everything artistic,
and especially the Glass Bead Game.
Since all that is known to us of Knecht's life took place in Castalia, in that most
tranquil and serene region of our mountainous country, which in the old days used to be
called, in the poet Goethe's phrase, "the pedagogical province," we shall at the risk of
boring the reader with matters long familiar once more briefly sketch the character of
famous Castalia and the structure of her schools. These schools, for brevity known as the
elite schools, constitute a wise and flexible system by means of which the administration
(a Council of Studies consisting of twenty councillors, ten representing the Board of
Educators and ten representing the Order) draws candidates from among the most gifted
pupils in the various sections and schools of the country, in order to supply new
generations for the Order and for all the important offices in the secondary school system
and the universities. The multitude of ordinary schools, gymnasia, and other schools in
the country, whether technical or humanistic in character, are for more than ninety per
cent of our students preparatory schools for the professions. They terminate with an
entrance examination for the university. At the university there is a specific course of
study for each subject. Such is the standard curriculum for our students, as everyone
knows. These schools make reasonably strict demands and do their best to exclude the
untalented.
But alongside or above these schools we have the system of elite schools, to
which only the pupils of extraordinary gifts and character are admitted. Entrance to them
is not controlled by examinations. Instead, the elite pupils are chosen by their teachers,
according to their judgment, and are recommended to the Castalian authorities. One day a
teacher suggests to a child of eleven or twelve that if he wished he could perhaps enter
one of the Castalian schools next semester. Does he feel attracted by the idea; does he
feel any vocation for it? The boy is given time to think it over. If he then agrees, and if
the unqualified consent of both parents is obtained, one of the elite schools admits him on
probation. The directors and the highest-level teachers of these elite schools (by no means
the faculties of the universities) form the Board of Educators, which has charge of all
education and all intellectual organizations in the country. Once a boy becomes an elite
pupil (and assuming he does not fail any of the courses, in which case he is sent back to
the ordinary schools) he no longer has to prepare for a profession or some specialty that
will subsequently become his livelihood. Rather, the Order and the hierarchy of
academics are recruited from among the elite pupils, everyone from the grammar school
teachers to the highest officers, the twelve Directors of Studies, also called Masters, and
the Ludi Magister, the director of the Glass Bead Game.
As a rule, the last courses in the elite schools are completed between the ages of
twenty-two and twenty-five. The graduate is then admitted to the Order. Thereafter, all
educational and research institutions of the Order and of the Board of Educators are
available to the former elite pupils, all the libraries, archives, laboratories, and so on,
together with a large staff of teachers if they desire further study, and all the facilities of
the Glass Bead Game. A degree of specialization begins even during the school years. In
the upper ranges of the elite schools those who show special aptitudes for languages,
philosophy, mathematics, or whatever are shifted to the curriculum which provides the
best nourishment for their talents. Most of these pupils end up as subject teachers in the
public schools and universities. They remain, even though they have left Castalia,
members of the Order for life. That is to say, they stand at an austere remove from the
"normals" (those who were not educated in the elite schools) and can never -- unless they
resign the Order -- become professional men, such as doctors, lawyers, engineers, and so
on. They are subject for life to the rules of the Order, which include poverty and
bachelorhood. The common people call them in a half-derisive, half-respectful tone "the
mandarins."
Thus the bulk of former elite pupils find their ultimate destiny as schoolmasters.
The tiny remainder, the top flight of the Castalian schools, can devote themselves to free
study for as long as they please. A contemplative, diligent intellectual life is reserved for
them. Many a highly gifted person who for one reason or another, perhaps some physical
defect or quirk of character, is not suited to become a teacher or to hold a responsible post
in the superior or inferior Boards of Educators, may go on studying, researching, or
collecting throughout his life as a pensioner of the authorities. His contribution to society
then consists mostly of works of pure scholarship. Some are placed as advisers to
dictionary committees, archives, libraries, and so on; others pursue scholarship as art for
art's sake. A good many of them have devoted their lives to highly abstruse and
sometimes peculiar subjects, such as Lodovicus Crudelis who toiled for thirty years
translating all extant ancient Egyptian texts into both Greek and Sanscrit, or the
somewhat peculiar Chattus Calvensis II who has bequeathed to us four immense folio
volumes on The Pronunciation of Latin in the Universities of Southern Italy toward the
End of the Twelfth Century. This work was intended as Part One of a History of the
Pronunciation of Latin from the Twelfth to the Sixteenth Centuries. But in spite of its one
thousand manuscript pages, it has remained a fragment, for no one has carried on the
work.
It is understandable that there has been a good deal of joking about purely learned
works of this type. Their actual value for the future of scholarship and for the people as a
whole cannot be demonstrated. Nevertheless, scholarship, as was true for art in the olden
days, must indeed have far-flung grazing grounds, and in pursuit of a subject which
interests no one but himself a scholar can accumulate knowledge which provides
colleagues with information as valuable as that stored in a dictionary or an archive.
As far as possible, scholarly works such as the above-mentioned were printed.
The real scholars were left in almost total freedom to ply their studies and their Games,
and no one objected that a good many of their works seemed to bring no immediate
benefits to the people or the community and, inevitably, seemed to nonscholars merely
luxurious frivolities. A good many of these scholars have been smiled at for the nature of
their studies, but none has ever been reproved, let alone had his privileges withdrawn.
Nor were they merely tolerated; they enjoyed the respect of the populace, in spite of
being the butts of many jokes. This respect was founded on the sacrifice with which all
members of the scholarly community paid for their intellectual privileges. They had
many amenities; they had a modest allotment of food, clothing, and shelter; they had
splendid libraries, collections, and laboratories at their disposal. But in return they
renounced lush living, marriage, and family. As a monastic community they were
excluded from competition in the world. They owned no property, received no titles and
honors, and in material things had to content themselves with a very simple life. If one
wanted to expend the years of his life deciphering a single ancient inscription, he was free
to do so, and would even be helped. But if he desired good living, rich clothing, money,
or titles, he found these things inexorably barred. Those for whom such gratifications
were important usually returned to "the world" quite young; they became paid teachers or
tutors or journalists; they married or in other ways sought out a life to suit their tastes.
When the time came for Joseph Knecht to leave Berolfingen, it was his music
teacher who accompanied him to the railroad station. Saying good-by to this teacher was
painful, and his heart also swelled a little with a feeling of loneliness and uncertainty after
the train started and the whitewashed stepped gable of the old castle tower dropped out of
sight and did not reappear. Many another pupil has set out on this first journey with far
more turbulent feelings, frightened and in tears. Joseph had inwardly already transferred
his allegiance; he withstood the journey well. And he did not have far to go.
He had been assigned to the Eschholz school. There had been pictures of this
school hanging in his principal's office. Eschholz was the largest and the newest complex
of schools in Castalia. The buildings were all modern. There was no town in the vicinity,
only a village-like small settlement set among woods. Beyond the settlement the school
spread out, wide, level, and cheerful, the buildings enclosing a large open quadrangle. In
the center of the quadrangle, arranged like the five on a die, five enormous, stately trees
raised their dark cones to the sky. The huge rectangle was partly in lawn, partly in gravel,
its expanse broken only by two large swimming pools, fed by running water. Wide,
shallow steps led down to the pools. At the entrance to this sunny plaza stood the
schoolhouse, the only tall building in the complex. There were two wings, each flanked
by a five-columned portico. All the rest of the buildings enclosing the quadrangle were
very low, flat, and unadorned, divided into perfectly equal sections, each of which led out
into the plaza through an arcade and down a low flight of steps. Pots of flowers stood in
the openings of most of the arcades.
In keeping with Castalian custom, Joseph was not received by a school attendant
and taken to a principal or a committee of teachers. Instead, a schoolmate met him, a tall,
good-looking boy in clothes of blue linen, a few years older than Joseph. He shook hands,
saying, "My name is Oscar; I'm the senior boy in Hellas House, where you will be living.
I've been assigned to welcome you and show you around. You're not expected to attend
classes until tomorrow, so we have plenty of time to look around. You'll get the hang of
things soon enough. And until you have become adjusted, please consider me your friend
and mentor, and your protector as well, in case some of the fellows bother you. There are
always some who think they have to haze the new boys a little. But it won't be bad, take it
from me. I'll show you Hellas House first, so you'll see where you're going to live."
Thus, in the traditional fashion, Oscar greeted the newcomer; the housemaster had
appointed him Joseph's mentor, and he in fact made an effort to play his part well. It is,
after all, a part the seniors usually find congenial, and if a fifteen-year-old takes the
trouble to charm a thirteen-year-old by employing a tone of affable comradeship with a
touch of patronage, he will almost always succeed. During Joseph's first few days his
mentor treated him like a guest whom a courteous host pampers in the hope that he will,
should he happen to depart the next day, take away with him a good impression of host
and house.
Joseph was shown to a room which he would be sharing with two other boys. He
was served rusks and a cup of fruit juice. He was shown the whole of Hellas House, one
of the dormitories of the large quadrangle; he was shown where to hang his towel in the
steam bath, and in which corner he was allowed to keep potted plants, if he wanted them.
Before evening fell he was also taken to the launderer at the washhouse, where a blue
linen suit was selected and fitted for him.
From the very first Joseph felt at ease in the place. He gaily fell in with Oscar's
tone and showed only the slightest trace of bashfulness, although he naturally regarded
this older boy, who had obviously been at home in Castalia for a long time, as something
of a demigod. He even enjoyed the bits of showing-off, as when Oscar would weave a
complicated Greek quotation into his talk only to recall politely that the new boy of
course couldn't understand, naturally not, how could he be expected to!
In any case, life at a boarding school was nothing new to Joseph. He fitted in
without difficulty. For that matter, no important events of his years at Eschholz have been
recorded. The terrible fire in the schoolhouse must have happened after his time. Portions
of his scholastic record have been traced; they show that he occasionally had the highest
marks in music and Latin, and somewhat above average in mathematics and Greek. Now
and then there are entries about him in the "House Book," such as "ingenium valde
capax, studia non angusta, mores probantur" or "ingenium felix et profectuum
avidissimum, moribus placet officiosis." What punishments he received at Eschholz can
no longer be determined; the disciplinary register was lost in the fire, along with so much
else. There is the testimony of a fellow pupil that during the four years at Eschholz
Knecht was punished only once (by being excluded from the weekly outing), and that his
demerit had consisted in obstinately refusing to name a schoolmate who had done
something against the rules. The anecdote sounds plausible. Knecht undoubtedly was
always a good comrade and never servile toward his superiors. Nevertheless, it seems
highly unlikely that this was actually his sole punishment in four years.
Since our data on Knecht's early period in the elite school are so sparse, we cite a
passage from one of his later lectures on the Glass Bead Game. Knecht's own
manuscripts of these lectures for beginners are not available, it should be noted; he
delivered them extemporaneously, and a pupil took them down in shorthand. At one point
Knecht speaks about analogies and associations in the Glass Bead Game, and in regard to
the latter distinguishes between "legitimate," universally comprehensible associations and
those that are "private" or subjective. He remarks: "To give you an example of private
associations that do not forfeit their private value although they have no place in the
Glass Bead Game, I shall tell you of one such association that goes back to my own
schooldays. I was about fourteen years old, and it was the season when spring is already
in the air, February or March. One afternoon a schoolmate invited me to go out with him
to cut a few elder switches. He wanted to use them as pipes for a model water mill. We
set out, and it must have been an unusually beautiful day in the world or in my own mind,
for it has remained in my memory, and vouchsafed me a little experience. The ground
was wet, but free of snow; strong green shoots were already breaking through on the edge
of streams. Buds and the first opening catkins were already lending a tinge of color to the
bare bushes, and the air was full of scent, a scent imbued with life and with
contradictions. There were smells of damp soil, decaying leaves, and young growth; any
moment one expected to smell the first violets although there were none yet.
"We came to the elder bushes. They had tiny buds, but no leaves, and as I cut off
a twig, a powerful, bittersweet scent wafted toward me. It seemed to gather and multiply
all the other smells of spring within itself. I was completely stunned by it; I smelled my
knife, smelled my hand, smelled the elder twig. It was the sap that gave off so insistent
and irresistible a fragrance. We did not talk about it, but my friend also thoughtfully
smelled for a long time. The fragrance meant something to him also.
"Well now, every experience has its element of magic. In this case the onset of
spring, which had enthralled me as I walked over the wet, squishing meadows and
smelled the soil and the buds, had now been concentrated into a sensual symbol by the
fortissimo of that elder shrub's fragrance. Possibly I would never have forgotten this scent
even if the experience had remained isolated. Rather, every future encounter with that
smell deep into my old age would in all probability have revived the memory of that first
time I had consciously experienced the fragrance. But now a second element entered in.
At that time I had found an old volume of music at my piano teacher's. It was a volume of
songs by Franz Schubert, and it exerted a strong attraction upon me. I had leafed through
it one time when I had a rather long wait for the teacher, and had asked to borrow it for a
few days. In my leisure hours I gave myself up to the ecstasy of discovery. Up to that
time I had not known Schubert at all, and I was totally captivated by him. And now, on
the day of that walk to the elderberry bush or the day after, I discovered Schubert's spring
song, "Die linden Lüfte sind erwacht," and the first chords of the piano accompaniment
assailed me like something already familiar. Those chords had exactly the same fragrance
as the sap of the young elder, just as bittersweet, just as strong and compressed, just as
full of the forthcoming spring. From that time on the association of earliest spring,
fragrance of elder, Schubert chords has been fixed and absolutely valid, for me. As soon
as the first chord is struck I immediately smell the tartness of the sap, and both together
mean to me: spring is on the way.
"This private association of mine is a precious possession I would not willingly
give up. But the fact that two sensual experiences leap up every time I think, 'spring is
coming' -- that fact is my own personal affair. It can be communicated, certainly, as I
have communicated it to you just now. But it cannot be transmitted. I can make you
understand my association, but I cannot so affect a single one of you that my private
association will become a valid symbol for you in your turn, a mechanism which
infallibly reacts on call and always follows the same course."
One of Knecht's fellow pupils, who later rose to the rank of First Archivist of the
Glass Bead Game, maintained that Knecht on the whole had been a merry boy, though
without a trace of boisterousness. When playing music he would sometimes have a
wonderfully rapt, blissful expression. He was rarely seen in an excited or passionate
mood, except at the rhythmic ball game, which he loved. But there were times when this
friendly, healthy boy attracted attention, and gave rise to mockery or anxiety. This
happened when pupils were dismissed, a fairly frequent occurrence in the lower classes
of the elite schools. The first time a classmate was missing from classes and games, did
not return next day, and word went around that he was not sick but dismissed, had
already departed and would not be returning, Knecht was more than subdued. For days on
end he seemed to be distraught.
Years later he himself commented on this matter: "Every time a pupil was sent
back from Eschholz and left us, I felt as if someone had died. If I had been asked the
reason for my sorrow, I would have said that I felt pity for the poor fellow who had
spoiled his future by frivolity and laziness, and that there was also an element of anxiety
in my feeling, fear that this might possibly happen to me some day. Only after I had
experienced the same thing many times, and basically no longer believed that the same
fate could overtake me as well, did I begin to see somewhat more deeply into the matter.
I then no longer felt the expulsion of an electus merely as a misfortune and punishment. I
came to realize that the dismissed boys in a good many cases were quite glad to be
returning home. I felt that it was no longer solely a matter of judgment and punishment,
but that the 'world' out there, from which we electi had all come once upon a time, had
not abruptly ceased to exist as it had seemed to me. Rather, for a good many among us it
remained a great and attractive reality which tempted and ultimately recalled these boys.
And perhaps it was that not only for individuals, but for all of us; perhaps it was by no
means only the weaker and inferior souls upon whom the remote world exerted so strong
an attraction. Possibly the apparent relapse they had suffered was not a fall and a cause
for suffering, but a leap forward and a positive act. Perhaps we who were so good about
remaining in Eschholz were in fact the weaklings and the cowards."
As we shall see, these thoughts were to return to him, and very forcefully.
Every encounter with the Music Master was a great joy to him. The Master came
to Eschholz once every two or three months at least to supervise the music classes. He
also frequently stayed a few days as the guest of one of the teachers who was a close
friend. Once he personally conducted the final rehearsals for the performance of a vesper
by Monteverdi. But above all he kept an eye on the more talented of the music pupils,
and Knecht was among the honored recipients of his paternal friendship. Every so often
he would sit at the piano with Joseph in one of the practice rooms and go through the
works of his favorite composers with him, or else play over a classical example from one
of the old handbooks on the theory of composition. "To construct a canon with the Music
Master, or to hear him develop a badly constructed one to its absurd logical conclusion,
frequently had about it a solemnity, or I might also say, a gaiety, like nothing else in the
world. Sometimes one could scarcely contain one's tears, and sometimes one could not
stop laughing. One emerged from a private music lesson with him as from a bath or a
massage."
Knecht's schooldays at Eschholz at last drew to a close. Along with a dozen or so
other pupils of his level he was to be transferred to a school on the next stage or level.
The principal delivered the usual speech to these candidates, describing once again the
significance and the rules of the Castalian schools and more or less sketching for the
graduates, in the name of the Order, the path they would be traveling, at the end of which
they would be qualified to enter the Order themselves. This solemn address was part of
the program for a day of ceremonies and festivities during which teachers and fellow
pupils alike treat the graduates like guests. On such days there are always carefully
prepared performances -- this time it was a great seventeenth-century cantata -- and the
Music Master had come in order to hear it.
After the principal's address, while everyone was on the way to the bravely
bedecked dining hall, Knecht approached the Master with a question. "The principal," he
said, "told us how things are outside of Castalia, in the ordinary schools and colleges. He
said that the students at the universities study for the 'free' professions. If I understood
him rightly, these are professions we do not even have here in Castalia. What is the
meaning of that? Why are just those professions called 'free'? And why should we
Castalians be excluded from them?"
The Magister Musicae drew the young man aside and stood with him under one of
the giant trees. An almost sly smile puckered the skin around his eyes into little wrinkles
as he replied: "Your name is Knecht,* my friend, and perhaps for that reason the word
'free' is so alluring for you. But do not take it too seriously in this case. When the nonCastalians speak of the free professions, the word may sound very serious and even
inspiring. But when we use it, we intend it ironically. Freedom exists in those professions
only to the extent that the student chooses the profession himself. That produces an
appearance of freedom, although in most cases the choice is made less by the student than
by his family, and many a father would sooner bite off his tongue than really allow his
son free choice. But perhaps that is a slander; let us drop this objection. Let us say that
the freedom exists, but it is limited to the one unique act of choosing the profession.
Afterward all freedom is over. When he begins his studies at the university, the doctor,
lawyer, or engineer is forced into an extremely rigid curriculum which ends with a series
of examinations. If he passes them, he receives his license and can thereafter pursue his
profession in seeming freedom. But in doing so he becomes the slave of base powers; he
is dependent on success, on money, on his ambition, his hunger for fame, on whether or
not people like him. He must submit to elections, must earn money, must take part in the
ruthless competition of castes, families, political parties, newspapers. In return he has the
freedom to become successful and well-to-do, and to be hated by the unsuccessful, or
vice versa. For the elite pupil and later member of the Order, everything is the other way
around. He does not 'choose' any profession. He does not imagine that he is a better judge
of his own talents than are his teachers. He accepts the place and the function within the
hierarchy that his superiors choose for him -- if, that is, the matter is not reversed and the
qualities, gifts, and faults of the pupil compel the teachers to send him to one place or
another. In the midst of this seeming unfreedom every electus enjoys the greatest
imaginable freedom after his early courses. Whereas the man in the 'free' professions
must submit to a narrow and rigid course of studies with rigid examinations in order to
train for his future career, the electus, as soon as he begins studying independently,
enjoys so much freedom that there are many who all their lives choose the most abstruse
and frequently almost foolish studies, and may continue without hindrance as long as
their conduct does not degenerate. The natural teacher is employed as teacher, the natural
educator as educator, the natural translator as translator; each, as if of his own accord,
finds his way to the place in which he can serve, and in serving be free. Moreover, for the
rest of his life he is saved from that 'freedom' of career which means such terrible slavery.
He knows nothing of the struggle for money, fame, rank; he recognizes no parties, no
dichotomy between the individual and the office, between what is private and what is
public; he feels no dependence upon success. Now do you see, my son, that when we
speak of the free professions, the word 'free' is meant rather humorously."
* Serf, servant.
Knecht's departure from Eschholz marked the end of an era in his life. If hitherto
he had lived a happy childhood, in a willing subordination and harmony almost without
problems, there now began a period of struggle, development, and complex difficulties.
He was about seventeen years old when he was informed of his impending transfer. A
number of his classmates received the same announcement, and for a short while there
was no more important question among the elect, and none more discussed, than the
place to which each of them would be transplanted. In keeping with tradition, they were
told only a few days before their departure, and between the graduation ceremony and
departure there were several days of vacation.
During this vacation something splendid happened to Knecht. The Music Master
proposed he take a walking trip and visit him, spending a few days as his guest. That was
a great and rare honor. Early one morning Knecht set out with a fellow graduate -- for he
was still considered an Eschholz pupil, and at this level boys were not allowed to travel
alone. They tramped toward the forest and the mountains, and when after three hours of
steady climbing through shady woods they reached a treeless summit, they saw far below
them, already small and easy to grasp as a whole, their Eschholz, recognizable even at
this distance by the dark mass of the five giant trees, the quadrangle with its segments of
lawn and sparkling pools, the tall schoolhouse, the service buildings, the village, the
famous grove of ash trees from which the school took its name. The two youths stood
still, looking down. A good many of us cherish the memory of this lovely view; it was
then not very different from the way it looks today, for the buildings were rebuilt after the
great fire, and three of the five tall trees survived the blaze. They saw their school lying
below them, their home for many years, to which they would soon be bidding good-by,
and both of them felt their hearts contract at the sight.
"I think I've never before really seen how beautiful it is," Joseph's companion
said. "But I suppose it's because I'm seeing it for the first time as something I must leave
and say farewell to."
"That's exactly it," Knecht said. "You're right, I feel the same way. But even
though we are goihg away, we won't after all be leaving Eschholz. Only the ones who
have gone away forever have really left it, like Otto, for instance, who could make up
such funny bits of Latin doggerel, or Charlemagne, who could swim so long under water,
and the others. They really said farewell and broke away. It's a long time since I've
thought about them, but now they come back to me. Laugh at me if you like, but in spite
of everything there's something impressive to me about those apostates, just as there is a
grandeur about the fallen angel Lucifer. Perhaps they did the wrong thing, or rather,
undoubtedly they did the wrong thing, but all the same they did something, accomplished
something; they ventured a leap, and that took courage. We others have been
hardworking and patient and reasonable, but we haven't done anything, we haven't taken
any leaps."
"I don't know," his companion said. "Many of them neither did anything nor
ventured anything; they simply fooled around until they were dismissed. But maybe I
don't quite understand you. What do you mean about leaping?"
"I mean being able to take a plunge, to take things seriously, to -- well, that's just
it, to leap. I wouldn't want to leap back to my former home and my former life; it doesn't
attract me and I've almost forgotten it. But I do wish that if ever the time comes and it
proves to be necessary, that I too will be able to free myself and leap, only not backward
into something inferior, but forward and into something higher."
"Well, that is what we are headed for. Eschholz was one step; the next will be
higher, and finally the Order awaits us."
"Yes, but that isn't what I meant. Let's move on, amice; walking is so great, it will
cheer me up again. We've really given ourselves a case of the dumps."
This mood and those words, which his classmate recorded, already sound the note
which prevailed during the stormy period of Knecht's adolescence.
The hikers tramped for two days before they reached the Music Master's current
home, Monteport, high in the mountains, where the Master lived in the former monastery,
giving a course for conductors. Knecht's classmate was lodged in the guest house, while
Knecht himself was assigned a small cell in the Magister's apartment. He had barely
unpacked his knapsack and washed when his host came in. The venerable man shook
hands with the boy, sat down with a small sigh, and for a few minutes closed his eyes, as
was his habit when he was very tired. Then, looking up with a friendly smile, he said:
"Forgive me; I am not a very good host. You have just come from a long hike and must
be tired, and to tell the truth so am I -- my day is somewhat overcrowded -- but if you are
not yet ready for bed, I should like to have an hour with you in my study. You will be
staying here two days, and tomorrow both you and your classmate will be dining with
me, but unfortunately my time is so limited, and we must somehow manage to save the
few hours I need for you. So shall we begin right away?"
He led Knecht into a large vaulted cell empty of furniture but for an old piano and
two chairs. They sat down in the chairs.
"You will soon be entering another stage," the Master said. "There you will learn
all sorts of new things, some of them very pleasant. Probably you'll also begin dabbling
in the Glass Bead Game before long. All that is very fine and important, but one thing is
more important than anything else: you are going to learn meditation there. Supposedly
all the students learn it, but one can't go checking up on them. I want you to learn it
properly and well, just as well as music; then everything else will follow of its own
accord. Therefore I'd like to give you the first two or three lessons myself; that was the
purpose of my invitation. So today and tomorrow and the day after tomorrow let us try to
meditate for an hour each day, and moreover on music. You will be given a glass of milk
now, so that hunger and thirst do not disturb you; supper will be brought to us later."
He rapped on the door, and a glass of milk was brought in.
"Drink slowly, slowly," he admonished. "Take your time, and do not speak."
Knecht drank his cool milk very slowly. Opposite him, the dear man sat with his
eyes closed again. His face looked very old, but friendly; it was full of peace, and he was
smiling to himself, as though he had stepped down into his own thoughts like a tired man
into a footbath. Tranquility streamed from him; Knecht felt it, and himself grew calmer.
Now the Magister turned on his chair and placed his hands on the piano. He
played a theme, and carried it forward with variations; it seemed to be a piece by some
Italian master. He instructed his guest to imagine the progress of the music as a dance, a
continuous series of balancing exercises, a succession of smaller or larger steps from the
middle of an axis of symmetry, and to focus his mind entirely on the figure which these
steps formed. He played the bars once more, silently reflected on them, played them
again, then sat quite still, hands on his knees, eyes half closed, without the slightest
movement, repeating and contemplating the music within himself. His pupil, too, listened
within himself, saw fragments of lines of notes before him, saw something moving,
something stepping, dancing, and hovering, and tried to perceive and read the movement
as if it were the curves in the line of a bird's flight. The pattern grew confused and he lost
it; he had to begin over again; for a moment his concentration left him and he was in a
void. He looked around and saw the Master's still, abstracted face floating palely in the
twilight, found his way back again to that mental space he had drifted out of. He heard
the music sounding in it again, saw it striding along, saw it inscribing the line of its
movement, and followed in his mind the dancing feet of the invisible dancers. . .
It seemed to him that a long time had passed before he glided out of that space
once more, again became aware of the chair he sat on, the mat-covered stone floor, the
dimmer dusk outside the windows. He felt someone regarding him, looked up and into
the eyes of the Music Master, who was attentively studying him. The Master gave him an
almost imperceptible nod, with one finger played pianissimo the last variation of the
Italian piece, and stood up.
"Stay on," he said. "I shall be back. Try once again to track down the music; pay
attention to the figure. But don't force yourself; it's only a game. If you should fall asleep
over it, there's no harm."
He left; there was still a task awaiting him, left over from the overcrowded day. It
was no easy and pleasant task, none that he would have wished for. One of the students in
the conducting course was a gifted but vain and overbearing person. The Music Master
would have to speak to him now, curbing his bad habits, showing him his faults, all this
with an even balance of solicitude and superiority, love and authority. He sighed. What a
pity that no arrangements were ever final, that recognized errors were never eliminated
for good, that again and again the selfsame failings had to be combated, the selfsame
weeds plucked out. Talent without character, virtuosity without values, had dominated
musical life in the Age of the Feuilleton, had been extirpated during the musical
Renaissance -- and here was that same spirit again, making vigorous growth.
When he returned from his errand to have supper with Joseph, he found the boy
sitting still, but contented and no longer tired in the least. "It was beautiful," Joseph said
dreamily. "While it was going on, the music vanished completely; it changed."
"Let it reverberate inside you," the Master said, leading him into a small chamber
where a table was set with bread and fruit. They ate, and the Master invited him to sit in
on the conducting course for a while in the morning. Just before showing his guest to his
cell and retiring for the night, he said: "During your meditation you saw something; the
music appeared to you as a figure. If you feel so minded, try to copy it down."
In the guest cell Knecht found pencils and paper on the table, and before he went
to bed he tried to draw the figure which the music had assumed for him. He drew a line,
and moving diagonally off from the line at rhythmic intervals short tributary lines. It
looked something like the arrangement of leaves on the twig of a tree. What he had
produced did not satisfy him, but he felt impelled to try it again and yet again. At last he
playfully curved the line into a circle from which the tributary lines radiated, like flowers
in a garland. Then he went to bed and fell asleep quickly. He dreamed that he was once
again on that height above the woods, where he had rested with his classmate, and saw
dear Eschholz spread out below him. And as he looked down, the quadrangle of the
school building contracted into an oval and then spread out to a circle, a garland, and the
garland began turning slowly; it turned with increasing speed, until at last it was whirling
madly and burst, flying apart into twinkling stars.
He had forgotten this dream by the time he awoke. But later, during a morning
walk, the Master asked him whether he had dreamt, and it seemed to him that he must
have had an unpleasant experience in his dreams. He thought, recovered the dream, told
it, and was astonished at how innocuous it sounded. The Master listened closely.
"Should we be mindful of dreams?" Joseph asked. "Can we interpret them?"
The Master looked into his eyes and said tersely: "We should be mindful of
everything, for we can interpret everything."
After they had walked on a bit, he asked paternally: "Which school would you
most like to enter?"
Joseph flushed. He murmured quickly: "Waldzell, I think!"
The Master nodded. "I thought so. Of course you know the old saying: 'Gignit
autem artificiosam'. . ."
Still blushing, Joseph completed the saying familiar to every student: "Gignit
autem artificiosam lusorum gentem Cella Silvestris": "But Waldzell breeds the skillful
Glass Bead Game players."
The old man gave him a warm look. "Probably that is your path, Joseph. As you
well know, there are some who do not think well of the Glass Bead Game. They say it is
a substitute for the arts, and that the players are mere popularizers; that they can no
longer be regarded as truly devoted to the things of the mind, but are merely artistic
dilettantes given to improvisation and feckless fancy. You will see how much or how
little truth there is in that. Perhaps you yourself have notions about the Glass Bead Game,
expecting more of it than it will give you, or perhaps the reverse. There is no doubt that
the Game has its dangers. For that very reason we love it; only the weak are sent out on
paths without perils. But never forget what I have told you so often: our mission is to
recognize contraries for what they are: first of all as contraries, but then as opposite poles
of a unity. Such is the nature of the Glass Bead Game. The artistically inclined delight in
the Game because it provides opportunities for improvisation and fantasy. The strict
scholars and scientists despise it -- and so do some musicians also -- because, they say, it
lacks that degree of strictness which their specialties can achieve. Well and good, you
will encounter these antinomies, and in time you will discover that they are subjective,
not objective -- that, for example, a fancy-free artist avoids pure mathematics or logic not
because he understands them and could say something about them if he wished, but
because he instinctively inclines toward other things. Such instinctive and violent
inclinations and disinclinations are signs by which you can recognize the pettier souls. In
great souls and superior minds, these passions are not found. Each of us is merely one
human being, merely an experiment, a way station. But each of us should be on the way
toward perfection, should be striving to reach the center, not the periphery. Remember
this: one can be a strict logician or grammarian, and at the same time full of imagination
and music. One can be a musician or Glass Bead Game player and at the same time
wholly devoted to rule and order. The kind of person we want to develop, the kind of
person we aim to become, would at any time be able to exchange his discipline or art for
any other. He would infuse the Glass Bead Game with crystalline logic, and grammar
with creative imagination. That is how we ought to be. We should be so constituted that
we can at any time be placed in a different position without offering resistance or losing
our heads."
"I think I understand," Joseph said. "But are not those who have such strong
preferences and aversions simply more passionate natures, others just more sober and
temperate?"
"That seems to be true and yet it is not," the Master replied, laughing. "To be
capable of everything and do justice to everything, one certainly does not need less
spiritual force and élan and warmth, but more. What you call passion is not spiritual
force, but friction between the soul and the outside world. Where passion dominates, that
does not signify the presence of greater desire and ambition, but rather the misdirection
of these qualities toward an isolated and false goal, with a consequent tension and
sultriness in the atmosphere. Those who direct the maximum force of their desires toward
the center, toward true being, toward perfection, seem quieter than the passionate souls
because the flame of their fervor cannot always be seen. In argument, for example, they
will not shout and wave their arms. But I assure you, they are nevertheless burning with
subdued fires."
"Oh, if only it were possible to find understanding," Joseph exclaimed. "If only
there were a dogma to believe in. Everything is contradictory, everything tangential; there
are no certainties anywhere. Everything can be interpreted one way and then again
interpreted in the opposite sense. The whole of world history can be explained as
development and progress and can also be seen as nothing but decadence and
meaninglessness. Isn't there any truth? Is there no real and valid doctrine?"
The Master had never heard him speak so fervently. He walked on in silence for a
little, then said: "There is truth, my boy. But the doctrine you desire, absolute, perfect
dogma that alone provides wisdom, does not exist. Nor should you long for a perfect
doctrine, my friend. Rather, you should long for the perfection of yourself. The deity is
within you, not in ideas and books. Truth is lived, not taught. Be prepared for conflicts,
Joseph Knecht -- I can see they have already begun."
During those few days Joseph for the first time saw his beloved Magister in his
everyday life and work, and he felt intense admiration, although only a small part of what
the Music Master accomplished every day came into view. But most of all the Master
won his heart by taking such an interest in him, by having invited him, and by managing
to spare hours for him despite his being often so overworked and overtired. Nor was it
only the lessons. If this introduction to meditation made so deep and lasting an
impression upon him, it did so, as he later learned to appreciate, not because the Master's
technique was so especially subtle and unique, but only because of the Master's
personality and example. His later teachers, who instructed him in meditation during the
following year, gave him more guidance, more precise lessons; they controlled results
more closely, asked more questions, managed to do more correcting. The Music Master,
confident of his power over this young man, did very little teaching and talking. Mostly,
he merely set themes and showed the way by example. Knecht observed the way the
Master often looked so old and worn out, but after sinking into himself with half-closed
eyes he would once again manage to look so tranquil, vigorous, cheerful, and friendly. To
Joseph this renewal was a persuasive demonstration of the right way to the true springs,
the way from restiveness to peace. Whatever the Master had to say about this matter was
casually imparted to Knecht on brief walks or at meals.
We know also that at this time the Magister gave Knecht some first hints and
suggestions about the Glass Bead Game, but none of his actual words have been
preserved. Joseph was also struck by the fact that the Master took some trouble with
Joseph's companion, so that the boy would not feel he was only a hanger-on. The old man
seemed to think of everything.
The brief stay in Monteport, the three lessons in meditation, attendance at the
course for conductors, the few talks with the Master, meant a great deal to Joseph Knecht.
There was no question but that the Master had found the most effective time for
interposing briefly in Knecht's life. The chief purpose of his invitation, as he had said,
had been to commend meditation to Joseph; but this invitation had been no less important
in itself, as a distinction and a token that he was well thought of, that his superiors
expected something of him. It was the second stage of vocation. He had been granted
some insight into the inner spheres. If one of the twelve Masters summoned a pupil at his
level to come so close, that was not just an act of personal benevolence. What a Master
did was always more than personal.
Before they left, each of the boys received a small gift: the scores of two Bach
choral preludes for Joseph, a handsome pocket edition of Horace for his friend. The
Master, as he was bidding good-by to Joseph, said to him: "In a few days you will learn
which school you have been assigned to. I come to the higher schools less frequently than
to Eschholz, but I am sure we shall see each other there too, if I keep in good health. If
you care to, you might write me a letter once a year, especially about the course of your
musical studies. Criticism of your teachers is not prohibited, but I am not so concerned
about that. A great many things await you; I hope you will meet the challenges. Our
Castalia is not supposed to be merely an elite; it ought above all to be a hierarchy, a
structure in which every brick derives its meaning only from its place in the whole. There
is no path leading out of this whole, and one who climbs higher and is assigned to greater
and greater tasks does not acquire more freedom, only more and more responsibilities.
Till we meet again, young friend. It was a pleasure to me to have you here."
The two boys tramped back, and both were gayer and more talkative than they
had been on the way to Monteport. The few days in different air and amid different
sights, the contact with a different sphere of life, had relaxed them, made them freer from
Eschholz and the mood of parting there. It had also made them doubly eager for change
and the future. At many a resting place in the forest, or above one of the precipitous
gorges in the vicinity of Monteport, they took their wooden flutes from their pockets and
played duets, mostly folksongs. By the time they had once again reached that peak above
Eschholz, with its prospect of the institution and its trees, the conversation they had had
there seemed to both of them far away in the past. All things had taken on a new aspect.
They did not say a word about it; they felt a little ashamed of what they had felt and said
so short a while ago, which already had become outmoded and insubstantial.
In Eschholz they had to wait only until the following day to learn their
destinations. Knecht had been assigned to Waldzell.
TWO
WALDZELL
"But WALDZELL BREEDS the skillful Glass Bead Game players," runs the old saying
about this famous school. Among the Castalian schools of the second and third levels, it
was the one most devoted to the arts. That is to say, whereas at other schools a particular
branch of scholarship was distinctly dominant, such as classical philology in
Keuperheim, Aristotelian and Scholastic philosophy in Porta, mathematics in Planvaste,
Waldzell traditionally cultivated a tendency toward universality and toward an alliance
between scholarship and the arts. The highest symbol of these tendencies was the Glass
Bead Game. Even here, as at all the other schools, the Game was by no means taught
officially and as a compulsory subject. But Waldzell students devoted their private
studies almost exclusively to it. Then again, the town of Waldzell was after all the seat of
the official Glass Bead Game and its institutions. The famous Game Hall for the
ceremonial games was located here, as was the enormous Game Archives, with its
officialdom and its libraries. Here, too, was the residence of the Ludi Magister. And
although these institutions existed altogether independently and the school was in no way
attached to them, the spirit of the institutions permeated the school. Something of the
hallowed atmosphere of the great public Games spread over the whole area. The town
itself was very proud of being the home not only of a school, but of the Game also. The
townspeople called the students "scholars" and referred to those who attended the Game
School as "lusers" -- a corruption of lusores.
The Waldzell school was, incidentally, the smallest of the Castalian schools. The
number of students rarely exceeded sixty, and undoubtedly this circumstance also helped
to lend it an air of uniqueness and aristocracy, of special distinction, for here was the very
elite of the elite. Moreover, during the past several decades this venerable school had
produced many Masters and the majority of Glass Bead Game players. Not that
Waldzell's brilliant reputation was entirely uncontested. Some thought that the
Waldzellers were priggish aesthetes and pampered princes, useless for anything but the
Glass Bead Game. At times there would be a vogue among the schools for making
sardonic comments on the Waldzell students; but the very harshness of the jokes and
criticisms proves that jealousy and envy underlay them. All in all, the transfer to Waldzell
in itself implied a certain distinction. Joseph Knecht, too, realized that, and although he
was not ambitious in the vulgar sense of the word, he accepted the distinction with a
measure of joyous pride.
Along with several schoolmates, he arrived in Waldzell on foot. Full of high
expectations and ready for whatever might come, he walked through the southern gate
and was instantly enchanted by the dark-brown aspect of the town and the great bulk of
the former Cistercian monastery in which the school had been established. Even before
he had been given his new uniform, immediately after the reception snack in the porter's
lodge, he set out alone to explore his new home. He found the footpath that ran along the
remains of the ancient town wall above the river, stood on the arched bridge and listened
to the roaring of the millrace, walked past the graveyard and down the lane of linden
trees. He saw and recognized, beyond the tall hedges, the Vicus Lusorum, the adjacent
little settlement of the Glass Bead Game players. Here were the Festival Hall, the
Archives, the classrooms, the houses for guests and teachers. He saw coming from one of
these houses a man in the dress of the Glass Bead Game players, and decided that this
must be one of the fabulous lusores, possibly the Magister Ludi in person. The spell of
this atmosphere exerted a tremendous force upon him. Everything here seemed old,
venerable, sanctified, rich with tradition; here one was quite a bit closer to the Center
than in Eschholz. And as he returned from the Glass Bead Game district, he began to feel
other spells, possibly less venerable, but no less exciting. They came from the town itself,
this sample of the profane world with its business and commerce, its dogs and children,
its smells of stores and handicrafts, its bearded citizens and fat wives behind the shop
doors, the children playing and clamoring, the girls throwing mocking looks. Many
things reminded him of remote worlds he had once known, of Berolfingen. He had
thought all that entirely forgotten. Now deep layers in his soul responded to all this, to the
scenes, the sounds, the smells. A world less tranquil than that of Eschholz, but richer and
more colorful, seemed to be awaiting him here.
As a matter of fact, the school at first turned out to be the exact continuation of his
previous school, although with the addition of several new subjects. Nothing was really
new there except the meditation exercises; and after all the Music Master had already
given him a foretaste of these. He accepted meditation willingly enough, but without
regarding it as more than a pleasant, relaxing game. Only somewhat later -- as we shall
see in due time -- would he have a living experience of its true value.
The headmaster of Waldzell, Otto Zbinden, was an unusual, somewhat eccentric
man who inspired a certain amount of fear. He was nearing sixty at the time Knecht
entered. A good many of the entries we have examined concerning Joseph Knecht are set
down in his handsome and impetuous handwriting. But at the beginning the young man's
curiosity was captured far less by the teachers than by his fellow students. With two of
these in particular Knecht struck up a lively relationship, for which there is ample
documentation. The first of these was Carlo Ferromonte, a boy his own age to whom he
became attached during his very first months at Waldzell. (Ferromonte later rose to the
second-highest rank on the Board, as deputy to the Music Master; we are indebted to him
for, among other things, a History of Styles in Sixteenth-Century Lute Music.) The other
boys called him "Rice Eater" and prized him for his aptitude at sports. His friendship with
Joseph began with talks about music and led to joint studying and practicing which
continued for several years; we are informed about this partly by Knecht's rare but
copious letters to the Music Master. In the first of these letters Knecht calls Ferromonte a
"specialist and connoisseur in music rich in ornamentation, embellishments, trills, etc."
The boys played Couperin, Purcell, and other masters of the period around 1700. In one
of the letters Knecht gives a detailed account of these practice sessions and this music "in
which many of the pieces have some embellishment over almost every note." He
continues: "After one has played nothing but turns, shakes, and mordents for a few hours,
one's fingers feel as if they are charged with electricity."
In fact he made great progress in music. By his second or third year at Waldzell
he was reading and playing the notations, clefs, abbreviations, and figured basses of all
centuries and styles with tolerable fluency. He had made himself at home in the realm of
Western music, as much of it as has been preserved for us, in that special way that
proceeds from practical craftsmanship and is not above taking utmost heed of a piece of
music's sensuous and technical aspects as a means for penetrating the spirit. His intense
concern with the sensuous quality of music, his efforts to understand the spirit of various
musical styles from the physical nature of the sounds, the sensations in the ear, deterred
him for a remarkably long time from devoting himself to the elementary course in the
Glass Bead Game. In one of his lectures in subsequent years he remarked: "One who
knows music only from the extracts which the Glass Bead Game distills from it may well
be a good Glass Bead Game player, but he is far from being a musician, and presumably
he is no historian either. Music does not consist only in those purely intellectual
oscillations and figurations which we have abstracted from it. All through the ages its
pleasure has primarily consisted in its sensuous character, in the outpouring of breath, in
the beating of time, in the colorations, frictions, and stimuli which arise from the
blending of voices in the concord of instruments. Certainly the spirit is the main thing,
and certainly the invention of new instruments and the alteration of old ones, the
introduction of new keys and new rules or new taboos regarding construction and
harmony are always mere gestures and superficialities, even as the costumes and fashions
of nations are superficialities. But one must have apprehended and tasted these superficial
and sensuous distinctions with the senses to be able to interpret from them the nature of
eras and styles. We make music with our hands and fingers, with our mouths and lungs,
not with our brains alone, and someone who can read notes but has no command of any
instrument should not join in the dialogue of music. Thus, too, the history of music is
hardly to be understood solely in terms of an abstract history of styles. For example, the
periods of decadence in music would remain totally incomprehensible if we failed to
recognize in each one of them the preponderance of the sensuous and quantitative
elements over the 'spiritual element.' "
For a time it appeared as if Knecht had decided to become nothing but a musician.
In favor of music he neglected all the optional subjects, including the introductory course
in the Glass Bead Game, to such an extent that toward the end of the first semester the
headmaster called him to an accounting. Knecht refused to be intimidated; he stubbornly
insisted on his rights. It is said that he told the headmaster: "If I fail in any official
subject, you could rightly reprimand me. On the other hand I have the right to devote
three quarters or even four quarters of my free time to music. I stand on the statutes of the
school." Headmaster Zbinden was sensible enough not to insist, but he naturally
remembered this student and is said to have treated him with cold severity for a long
time.
This peculiar period in Knecht's student days lasted for more than a year,
probably for about a year and a half. He received normal but not brilliant marks and -- to
judge by the incident with the headmaster -- his behavior was marked by a rather defiant
withdrawal, no noteworthy friendships, but in compensation this extraordinary passion
for music-making. He abstained from almost all private studies, including the Glass Bead
Game. Several of these traits are undoubtedly signs of puberty; during this period he
probably encountered the other sex only by chance, and mistrustfully; presumably he was
quite shy -- like so many Eschholz pupils if they do not happen to have sisters at home.
He read a great deal, especially the German philosophers: Leibniz, Kant, and the
Romantics, among whom Hegel exerted by far the strongest attraction upon him.
We must now give some account of that other fellow student who played a
significant part in Knecht's life at Waldzell: the hospitant Plinio Designori. Hospitants
were boys who went through the elite schools as guests, that is, without the intention of
remaining permanently in the Pedagogic Province and entering the Order. Such
hospitants turned up every so often, although they were quite rare, for the Board of
Educators was naturally averse to the idea of educating students who intended to return
home and into the world after they finished their studies at the elite schools. However, the
country had several old patrician families who had performed notable services for
Castalia at the time of its foundation and in which the custom still prevailed (it has not
entirely died out to this day) of having one of the sons educated as a guest in the elite
schools. It had become an established prerogative for those few families, although of
course the boys in question had to be gifted enough to meet the standards of the schools.
These hospitants, although in every respect subject to the same rules as all elite
students, formed an exceptional group within the student body if only because they did
not grow increasingly estranged from their native soil and their families with each
passing year. On the contrary, they spent all the holidays at home and always remained
guests and strangers among their fellow students, since they preserved the habits and
ways of thinking of their place of origin. Home, a worldly career, a profession and
marriage awaited them. Only on very rare occasions did it happen that such a guest
student, captivated by the spirit of the Province, would obtain the consent of his family
and after all remain in Castalia and enter the Order. On the other hand, in the history of
our country there have been several statesmen who were guest students in their youth,
and now and then, when public opinion for one reason or another had turned against the
elite schools and the Order, these statesmen came stoutly to the defense of both.
Plinio Designori, then, was one such hospitant whom Joseph Knecht -- slightly his
junior -- encountered in Waldzell. He was a talented young man, particularly brilliant in
talk and debate, fiery and somewhat restive in temperament. His presence often troubled
Headmaster Zbinden, for although he was a good student and gave no cause for
reprimands, he made no effort to forget his exceptional position as a hospitant and to fall
into line as inconspicuously as possible. On the contrary, he frankly and belligerently
professed a non-Castalian, worldly point of view.
Inevitably, a special relationship sprang up between these two students. Both were
extremely gifted and both had a vocation; these qualities made them brothers, although in
everything else they were opposites. It would have required a teacher of unusual insight
and skill to extract the quintessence from the problem that thus arose and to employ the
rules of dialectics to derive synthesis from the antitheses. Headmaster Zbinden did not
lack the talent or will; he was not one of those teachers who find geniuses an
embarrassment. But for this particular case he lacked the important prerequisite: the trust
of both students. Plinio, who enjoyed the role of outsider and revolutionary, remained
permanently on his guard in his dealings with the headmaster; and unfortunately the
headmaster had clashed with Joseph Knecht over that question of his private studies, so
that Knecht, too, would not have turned to Zbinden for advice.
Fortunately, there was the Music Master. Knecht did turn to him with a request
for help and advice, and the wise old musician took the matter seriously and directed the
course of the game with masterly skill, as we shall see. In the hands of this Master the
greatest danger and temptation in young Knecht's life was converted into an honorable
task, and the young man proved able to cope with it. The psychological history of the
friendship-and-enmity between Joseph and Plinio -- a sonata movement on two themes,
or a dialectical interplay between two minds -- went somewhat as follows.
At first, of course, it was Designori who attracted his opponent. He was the elder;
he was a handsome, fiery, and well-spoken young man; and above all he was one of those
"from outside," a non-Castalian, a boy from the world, a person with father and mother,
uncles, aunts, brothers, and sisters, one for whom Castalia with all its rules, traditions,
and ideals represented only a stage along the road, a limited sojourn. For this rara avis
Castalia was not the world; for him Waldzell was a school like any other; for him the
"return to the world" was no disgrace and punishment; the future awaiting him was not
the Order but career, marriage, politics, in short that "real life" which every Castalian
secretly longed to know more about. For the "world" was the same thing for a Castalian
that it had long ago been for the penitents and monks: something inferior and forbidden,
no doubt, but nonetheless mysterious, tempting, fascinating. And Plinio truly made no
secret of his attachment to the world; he was not in the least ashamed of it. On the
contrary, he was proud of it. With a zeal still half boyish and histrionic, but also half
consciously propagandistic, he stressed his own differentness. He seized every pretext for
setting his secular views and standards against those of Castalia, and contending that his
own were better, juster, more natural, more human. In these arguments he bandied about
words like "nature" and "common sense," to the discredit of the overrefined, unworldly
spirit of the school. He made use of slogans and hyperbole, but had the good taste and
tact not to descend to crude provocations, but more or less to give the methods of
disputation customary in Waldzell their due. He wanted to defend the "world" and the
unreflective life against the "arrogant scholastic intellectuality" of Castalia, but he also
wanted to prove that he could do so with his opponents' weapons. He did not want to be
thought the dull-witted brute blindly trampling around in the flower garden of culture.
Now and again Joseph Knecht had stood, a silent but attentive listener, on the
edges of small groups of students whose center was Designori. Plinio usually did most of
the talking. With curiosity, astonishment, and alarm Joseph had heard Plinio excoriating
all authority, everything that was held sacred in Castalia. He heard everything questioned,
everything he believed in exposed as dubious or ridiculous. Joseph soon noted that many
in the audience did not take these speeches seriously; some, it was clear, listened only for
the fun of it, as people listen to a barker at a fair. Frequently, too, he heard some of the
boys answer Plinio's charges sarcastically or seriously. Still there were always several
schoolmates gathered around this boy Plinio; he was always the center of attention, and
whether or not there happened to be an opponent in the group, he always exerted an
attraction so strong that it was akin to seduction.
Joseph himself was as much stirred as those others who gathered around the lively
orator and listened to his tirades with astonishment or laughter. In spite of the trepidation
and even fear that he felt during such speeches, Joseph was aware of their sinister
attraction for him. He was drawn to them not just because they were amusing. On the
contrary, they seemed to concern him directly and seriously. Not that he would inwardly
have agreed with the audacious orator, but there were doubts whose very existence or
possibility you had only to know about and you instantly began to suffer them. At the
beginning it was not any serious suffering; it was merely a matter of being slightly
disturbed, uneasy -- a feeling compounded of powerful urge and guilty conscience.
The time had to come, and it came, when Designori noticed that among his
listeners was one to whom his words meant more than rousing entertainment and the fun
of argument: a fair-haired boy who looked handsome and finely wrought, but rather shy,
and who blushed and gave terse, embarrassed replies when Plinio said a friendly word to
him. Evidently this boy had been trailing after him for some time, Plinio thought, and
decided to reward him with a friendly gesture and win him over completely by inviting
him to his room that afternoon. To Plinio's surprise the boy held off, would not linger to
talk with him, and declined the invitation. Provoked, the older boy began courting the
reticent Joseph. Possibly he did so at first only out of vanity, but later he went about it in
all seriousness, for he sensed an antagonist who would be perhaps a future friend, perhaps
the opposite. Again and again he saw Joseph hanging around near him, and noted the
intensity with which Joseph listened, but the shy boy would always retreat as soon as he
tried to approach him.
There were reasons behind this conduct. Joseph had long since come to feel that
this other boy would mean something important to him, perhaps something fine, an
enlargement of his horizon, insight or illumination, perhaps also temptation and danger.
Whatever it was, this was a test he had to pass. He had told his friend Ferromonte about
the first stirrings of skepticism and restlessness that Plinio's talks had aroused in him, but
his friend had paid little attention; he dismissed Plinio as a conceited and self-important
fellow not worth listening to, and promptly buried himself in his music again. Instinct
warned Joseph that the headmaster was the proper authority to whom to bring his doubts
and queries; but since that little clash he no longer had a cordial and candid relationship
with Zbinden. He was afraid the headmaster might regard his coming to him with this
question as a kind of talebearing.
In this dilemma, which grew increasingly painful because of Plinio's efforts to
strike up a friendship, he turned to his patron and guardian angel, the Music Master, and
wrote him a very long letter which has been preserved. In part, it read:
"I am not yet certain whether Plinio hopes to win me over to his way of thinking,
or whether he merely wants someone to discuss these matters with. I hope it is the latter,
for to convert me to his views would mean leading me into disloyalty and destroying my
life, which after all is rooted in Castalia. I have no parents and friends on the outside to
whom I could return if I should ever really desire to. But even if Plinio's sacrilegious
speeches are not aimed at conversion and influencing, they leave me at a loss. For to be
perfectly frank with you, dear Master, there is something in Plinio's point of view that I
cannot gainsay; he appeals to a voice within me which sometimes strongly seconds what
he says. Presumably it is the voice of nature, and it runs utterly counter to my education
and the outlook customary among us. When Plinio calls our teachers and Masters a
priestly caste and us a pack of spoon-fed eunuchs, he is of course using coarse and
exaggerated language, but there may well be some truth to what he says, for otherwise I
would hardly be so upset by it. Plinio can say the most startling and discouraging things.
For example, he contends that the Glass Bead Game is a retrogression to the Age of the
Feuilleton, sheer irresponsible playing around with an alphabet into which we have
broken down the languages of the different arts and sciences. It's nothing but associations
and toying with analogies, he says. Or again he declares that our resigned sterility proves
the worthlessness of our whole culture and our intellectual attitudes. We analyze the laws
and techniques of all the styles and periods of music, he points out, but produce no new
music ourselves. We read and exposit Pindar or Goethe and are ashamed to create verse
ourselves. Those are accusations I cannot laugh at. And they are not the worst; they are
not the ones that wound me most. It is bad enough when he says, for example, that we
Castalians lead the life of artifically reared songbirds, do not earn our bread ourselves,
never face necessity and the struggle for existence, neither know or wish to know
anything about that portion of humanity whose labor and poverty provide the base for our
lives of luxury."
The letter concluded: "Perhaps I have abused your friendliness and kindness,
Reverendissime, and I am prepared to be reproved. Scold me, impose penances on me -- I
shall be grateful for them. But I am in dire need of advice. I can sustain the present
situation for a little while longer. But I cannot shape it into any real and fruitful
development, for I am too weak and inexperienced. Moreover, and perhaps this is the
worst of all, I cannot confide in our headmaster unless you explicitly command me to do
so. That is why I have troubled you with this affair, which is becoming a source of great
distress to me."
It would be of the greatest value to us if we also possessed the Master's reply to
this cry for help in black and white. But the reply was given orally. Shortly after Knecht
wrote, the Magister Musicae himself arrived in Waldzell to direct an examination in
music, and during the days he spent there he devoted considerable time to his young
friend. We know of this from Knecht's later recollections. The Music Master did not
make things easy for him. He began by looking closely into Knecht's grades and into the
matter of his private studies as well. The latter, he decided, were much too one-sided; in
this regard the headmaster had been right, and he insisted that Knecht admit as much to
the headmaster. He gave precise directives for Knecht's conduct toward Designori, and
did not leave until this question, too, had been discussed with Headmaster Zbinden. The
outcome was twofold: that remarkable joust between Designori and Knecht, which none
who looked on would ever forget; and an entirely new relationship between Knecht and
the headmaster. Not that this relationship ever partook of the affection and mystery that
linked Knecht to the Music Master, but at least it was lucid and relaxed.
The course that had been traced for Knecht determined the shape of his life for
some time. He had been given leave to accept Designori's friendship, to expose himself to
his influence and his attacks without intervention or supervision by his teachers. But his
mentor specifically charged him to defend Castalia against the critic, and to raise the
clash of views to the highest level. That meant, among other things, that Joseph had to
make an intensive study of the fundamentals of the prevailing system in Castalia and in
the Order, and to recall them to mind again and again. The debates between the two
friendly opponents soon became famous, and drew large audiences. Designori's
aggressive and ironic tone became subtler, his formulations stricter and more responsible,
his criticism more objective. Hitherto Plinio had been the winner in this contest; coming
from the "world," he possessed its experience, its methods, its means of attack, and some
of its ruthlessness as well. From conversations with adults at home he knew all the
indictments the world could muster against Castalia. But now Knecht's replies forced him
to realize that although he knew the world quite well, better than any Castalian, he did not
by any means know Castalia and its spirit as well as those who were at home here, for
whom Castalia had become both native soil and destiny. He was forced to realize, and
ultimately to admit, that he was a guest here, not a native; that the outside world had no
exclusive claim on self-evident principles and truths arrived at through centuries of
experience. Here too, in the Pedagogic Province, there was a tradition, what might even
be called a "nature," with which he was only imperfectly acquainted and which was now
being upheld by its spokesman, Joseph Knecht.
Knecht, for his part, in order to cope with his part as apologist, was obliged to put
a great deal of study, meditation, and self-discipline into clarifying and deepening his
understanding of what he was required to defend. In rhetoric Designori remained his
superior; his worldly training and cleverness supported his natural fire and ambition.
Even when he was being defeated on a point, he managed to think of the audience and
contrive a facesaving or witty line of retreat. Knecht, on the other hand, when his
opponent had driven him into a corner, was apt to say: "I shall have to think about that for
a while, Plinio. Wait a few days; I'll come back to that point."
The relationship had thus been given a dignified form. In fact, for the participants
and the listeners the dispute had already become an indispensable element in the school
life of Waldzell. But the pressure and the conflict had scarcely grown any easier for
Knecht. Because of the high degree of confidence and responsibility that had been placed
upon him, he mastered his assignment, and it is proof of the strength and soundness of his
nature that he carried it out without any visible damage. But privately, he suffered a great
deal. If he felt friendship for Plinio, he felt it not only for an engaging and clever,
cosmopolitan and articulate schoolmate, but also for that alien world which his friend and
opponent represented, with which he was becoming acquainted, however dimly, in
Plinio's personality, words, and gestures: that so-called "real" world in which there were
loving mothers and children, hungry people and poorhouses, newspapers and election
campaigns; that primitive and at the same time subtle world to which Plinio returned at
every vacation in order to visit his parents, brothers, and sisters, to pay court to girls, to
attend union meetings, or stay as a guest at elegant clubs, while Joseph remained in
Castalia, went tramping or swimming, practiced Froberger's subtle and different fugues,
or read Hegel.
Joseph had no doubt that he belonged in Castalia and was rightly leading a
Castalian life, a life without family, without a variety of legendary amusements, a life
without newspapers and also without poverty and hunger -- though for all that Plinio
hammered away at the drones' existence of the elite students, he too had so far never gone
hungry or earned his own bread. No, Plinio's world was not better and sounder. But it was
there, it existed, and as Joseph knew from history it had always been and had always been
similar to what it now was. Many nations had never known any other pattern, had no elite
schools and Pedagogic Province, no Order, Masters, and Glass Bead Game. The great
majority of all human beings on the globe lived a life different from that of Castalia,
simpler, more primitive, more dangerous, more disorderly, less sheltered. And this
primitive world was innate in every man; everyone felt something of it in his own heart,
had some curiosity about it, some nostalgia for it, some sympathy with it. The true task
was to be fair to it, to keep a place for it in one's own heart, but still not relapse into it.
For alongside it and superior to it was the second world, that of Castalia, the world of
Mind -- artificial, more orderly, more secure, but still in need of constant supervision and
study. To serve the hierarchy, but without doing an injustice to that other world, let alone
despising it, and also without eying it with vague desire or nostalgia -- that must be the
right course. For did not the small world of Castalia serve the great world, provide it with
teachers, books, methods, act as guardian for the purity of its intellectual functions and its
morality? Castalia remained the training ground and refuge for that small band of men
whose lives were to be consecrated to Mind and to truth. Then why were these two
worlds apparently unable to live in fraternal harmony, parallel and intertwined; why
could an individual not cherish and unite both within himself?
One of the rare visits from the Music Master came upon a day when Joseph,
exhausted by his task, was having a hard time preserving his balance. The Master
diagnosed his state from a few of the boy's allusions; he read it even more plainly in
Joseph's strained appearance, his restive looks, his somewhat nervous movements. He
asked a few probing questions, was met by moroseness and uncommunicativeness, and
gave up that approach. Seriously concerned, he took the boy to one of the practice rooms
under the pretext of telling him about a minor musicological discovery. He had Joseph
bring in and tune a clavichord, and involved him in a long tutoring session on the origin
of sonata form until the young man somewhat forgot his anxieties, yielded, and listened,
relaxed and grateful, to the Master's words and playing. Patiently, the Music Master took
what time was needed to put Joseph into a receptive state. And when he had succeeded,
when his lecture was over and he had concluded by playing one of the Gabrieli sonatas,
he stood up, began slowly pacing the little room, and told a story.
"Many years ago I was once much preoccupied with this sonata. That was during
the period of my free studies, before I was called to teaching and later to the post of
Music Master. At the time I was ambitious to work out a history of the sonata from a new
point of view; but then for a while I stopped making any progress at .all. I began more
and more to doubt whether all these musical and historical researches had any value
whatsoever, whether they were really any more than vacuous play for idle people, a
scanty aesthetic substitute for living a real life. In short, I had to pass through one of
those crises in which all studies, all intellectual efforts, everything that we mean by the
life of the mind, appear dubious and devalued and in which we tend to envy every
peasant at the plow and every pair of lovers at evening, or every bird singing in a tree and
every cicada chirping in the summer grass, because they seem to us to be living such
natural, fulfilled, and happy lives. We know nothing of their troubles, of course, of the
elements of harshness, danger, and suffering in their lot. In brief, I had pretty well lost my
equilibrium. It was far from a pleasant state; in fact it was very hard to bear. I thought up
the wildest schemes for escaping and gaining my freedom. For example, I imagined
myself going out into the world as an itinerant musician and playing dances for wedding
parties. If some recruiting officer from afar had appeared, as in old tales, and coaxed me
to don a uniform and follow any company of soldiers into any war, I would have gone
along. And so things went from bad to worse, as so often happens to people in such
moods. I so thoroughly lost my grip on myself that I could no longer deal with my trouble
alone, and had to seek help."
He paused for a moment and chuckled softly under his breath. Then he continued:
"Naturally I had a studies adviser, as the rules require, and of course it would have been
sensible and right as well as my duty to ask him for advice. But the fact is, Joseph, that
precisely when we run into difficulties and stray from our path and are most in need of
correction, precisely then we feel the greatest disinclination to return to the normal way
and seek out the normal form of correction. My adviser had been dissatisfied with my last
quarterly report; he had offered serious objections to it; but I had thought myself on the
way to new discoveries and had rather resented his objections. In brief, I did not like the
idea of going to him; I did not want to eat humble pie and admit that he had been right.
Nor did I want to confide in my friends. But there was an eccentric in the vicinity whom I
knew only by sight and hearsay, a Sanscrit scholar who went by the nickname of 'the
Yogi.' One day, when my state of mind had grown sufficiently unbearable, I paid a call
on this man, whose solitariness and oddity I had both smiled at and secretly admired. I
went to his cell intending to talk with him, but found him in meditation; he had adopted
the ritual Hindu posture and could not be reached at all. With a faint smile on his face, he
hovered, as it were, in total aloofness. I could do nothing but stand at the door and wait
until he returned from his absorption. This took a very long time, an hour or two hours,
and at last I grew tired and slid to the floor. There I sat, leaning against the wall,
continuing to wait. At the end I saw the man slowly awaken; he moved his head slightly,
stretched his shoulders, slowly uncrossed his legs, and as he was about to stand, up his
gaze fell upon me.
" 'What do you want?' he asked.
"I stood up and said, without thinking and without really knowing what I was
saying: 'It's the sonatas of Andrea Gabrieli.'
"He stood up at this point, seated me in his lone chair, and perched himself on the
edge of the table. 'Gabrieli?' he said. 'What has he done to you with his sonatas?'
"I began to tell him what had been happening to me, and to confess the
predicament I was in. He asked me about my background with an exactness that seemed
to me pedantic. He wanted to know about my studies of Gabrieli and the sonata, at what
hour I rose in the morning, how long I read, how much I practiced, when were my
mealtimes and when I went to bed. I had confided in him, in fact imposed myself on him,
so that I had to put up with his questions, but they made me ashamed; they probed more
and more mercilessly into details, and forced me to an analysis of my whole intellectual
and moral life during the past weeks and months.
"Then the Yogi suddenly fell silent, and when I looked puzzled he shrugged and
said: 'Don't you see yourself where the fault lies?' But I could not see it. At this point he
recapitulated with astonishing exactness everything he had learned from me by his
questioning. He went back to the first signs of fatigue, repugnance, and intellectual
constipation, and showed me that this could have happened only to someone who had
submerged himself disproportionately in his studies and that it was high time for me to
recover my self-control, arid to regain my energy with outside help. Since I had taken the
liberty of discontinuing my regular meditation exercises, he pointed out, I should at least
have realized what was wrong as soon as the first evil consequences appeared, and should
have resumed meditation. He was perfectly right. I had omitted meditating for quite a
while on the grounds that I had no time, was too distracted or out of spirits, or too busy
and excited with my studies. Moreover, as time went on I had completely lost all
awareness of my continuous sin of omission. Even now, when I was desperate and had
almost run aground, it had taken an outsider to remind me of it. As a matter of fact, I was
to have the greatest difficulty snapping out of this state of neglect. I had to return to the
training routines and beginners' exercises in meditation in order gradually to relearn the
art of composing myself and sinking into contemplation."
With a small sigh the Magister ceased pacing the room. "That is what happened to
me, and to this day I am still a little ashamed to talk about it. But the fact is, Joseph, that
the more we demand of ourselves, or the more our task at any given time demands of us,
the more dependent we are on meditation as a wellspring of energy, as the ever-renewing
concord of mind and soul. And -- I could if I wished give you quite a few more examples
of this -- the more intensively a task requires our energies, arousing and exalting us at one
time, tiring and depressing us at another, the more easily we may come to neglect this
wellspring, just as when we are carried away by some intellectual work we easily forget
to attend to the body. The really great men in the history of the world have all either
known how to meditate or have unconsciously found their way to the place to which
meditation leads us. Even the most vigorous and gifted among the others all failed and
were defeated in the end because their task or their ambitious dream seized hold of them,
made them into persons so possessed that they lost the capacity for liberating themselves
from present things, and attaining perspective. Well, you know all this; it's taught during
the first exercises, of course. But it is inexorably true. How inexorably true it is, one
realizes only after having gone astray."
This story had just enough effect upon Joseph for him to apprehend the risk he
himself was running, so that he turned to his meditation exercises with renewed
seriousness. What really impressed him was the fact that the Master had for the first time
revealed to him something of his personal life, of his youth and early studies. For the first
time Joseph fully realized that even a demigod, even a Master, had once been young and
capable of erring. He felt gratitude, too, for the confidence the revered Master had placed
in him by making this confession. It was possible for one to go astray, to flag, to make
mistakes, to break rules, and still to deal with all such difficulties, to find one's way back,
and in the end even to become a Master. Joseph overcame the crisis.
During the two or three years at Waldzell during which the friendship between
Plinio and Joseph continued, the school watched the spectacle of these combative friends
like a drama in which everyone had at least some small part, from the headmaster to the
youngest freshman. The two worlds, the two principles, had become embodied in Knecht
and Designori; each stimulated the other; every disputation became a solemn and
symbolic contest which concerned everyone at the school. From every contact with his
native soil on the holiday visits home Plinio would bring back new energy; and from
every withdrawal for reflection, from every new book, every meditation exercise, every
meeting with the Magister Musicae Joseph also derived new energy, made himself better
fitted to be the representative and advocate of Castalia. As a child he had experienced his
first vocation. Now he experienced the second. These years shaped and forged him into
the perfect Castalian.
He had also some time ago completed his elementary lessons in the Glass Bead
Game and even then, during holidays and under the eye of a Games Director, had begun
sketching out his own Glass Bead Games. In this activity he now discovered one of the
most abundant sources of joy and relaxation. Not since he had insatiably practiced
harpsichord and piano pieces with Carlo Ferromonte had anything done him so much
good, so refreshed, strengthened, reassured, and delighted him as did these first advances
into the starry firmament of the Glass Bead Game.
During these same years young Joseph Knecht wrote those poems which have
been preserved in Ferromonte's copy. It is quite possible that there were originally more
of them than have come down to us, and it may be assumed that the poems, the earliest of
which dates back to a time before Knecht's introduction to the Glass Bead Game, helped
him to carry out his role and to withstand the many tests of those critical years. Here and
there in these poems, some skillfully wrought and some hastily scribbled, every reader
will discover traces of the profound upheaval and crisis through which Knecht was then
passing under the influence of Plinio. A good many of the lines sound a note of profound
disturbance, of fundamental doubts about himself and the meaning of his life -- until, in
the poem entitled "The Glass Bead Game" he seems to have attained belief and surrender.
Incidentally, a measure of concession to Plinio's world, an element of rebellion against
certain unwritten laws of Castalia, is contained in the mere fact that he wrote these poems
and even on occasion showed them to several schoolmates. For while Castalia has in
general renounced the production of works of art (even musical production is known and
tolerated there only in the form of stylistically rigid composition exercises), writing
poetry was regarded as the most impossible, ridiculous, and prohibited of conceivable
acts. Thus these poems were anything but a game, anything but an idle calligraphic
amusement; it took high pressure to start this flow of productivity, and a certain defiant
courage was required to admit to the writing of these verses.
It should also be mentioned that Plinio Designori likewise underwent considerable
change and development under the influence of his antagonist. This was reflected in more
than the refinement of his methods of argument. During the comradely rivalry of those
school years Plinio saw his opponent steadily rising and maturing into an exemplary
Castalian. The figure of his friend more and more vigorously and vividly embodied for
him the spirit of the Province. Just as he himself had infected Joseph with some of the
atmospheric turbulence of his own world, he for his part inhaled the Castalian air and
succumbed to its charm and power. In his last year at the school, after a two-hour
disputation on the ideals and perils of monasticism, fought out in the presence of the
highest Glass Bead Game class, Plinio took Joseph out for a walk and made a confession
to him. We quote it from a letter of Ferromonte's:
"Of course I've known for a long time, Joseph, that you are not the credulous
Glass Bead Game player and Castalian saint whose part you have been playing so
splendidly. Each of us stands at an exposed spot in this battle, and each of us probably
knows that what he is fighting against rightfufiy exists and has its undeniable value. You
yourself take the side of intensive cultivation of the mind, I the side of natural life. In our
contest you have learned to track down the dangers of the natural life and have made
them your target. Your function has been to point out how natural, naive living without
discipline of the mind is bound to become a mire into which men sink, reverting to
bestiality. And I for my part must remind you again and again how risky, dangerous, and
ultimately sterile is a life based purely upon mind. Good, each defends what he believes
to be primary, you mind and I nature. But don't take offense -- it sometimes seems to me
that you actually and naively consider me an enemy of your Castalian principles, a fellow
who fundamentally regards your studies, exercises, and games as mere tomfoolery, even
though he briefly joins in them for one reason or another. How wrong you would be if
you really believed that, my friend. I'll confess to you that I am infatuated with your
hierarchy, that it often enthralls me like happiness itself. I'll confess to you that some
months ago, when I was at home with my parents for a while, I had it out with my father
and won his permission for me to remain a Castalian and enter the Order if this should be
my desire and decision at the end of my schooldays. I was happy when he at last gave his
consent. As it happens, I shall not make use of his permission; I've recently realized that.
Not that I've lost my taste for it, not at all. But I more and more see that for me to remain
among you would mean escaping. It would be a fine, a noble escape perhaps, but still an
escape. I shall return and become a man of the outside world, but one who continues
grateful to your Castalia, who will go on practicing a good many of your exercises, and
will come every year to join in the celebration of the great Glass Bead Game."
Knecht informed his friend Ferromonte of Plinio's confession with deep emotion.
And Ferromonte himself added, in the letter we have just cited: "To me, as a musician,
this confession of Plinio, to whom I had not always been entirely fair, was like a musical
experience. The contrast of world and Mind, or of Plinio and Joseph, had before my eyes
been transfigured from the conflict of two irreconcilable principles into a double
concerto."
When Plinio had come to the end of his four-year course and was about to return
home, he brought the headmaster a letter from his father inviting Joseph Knechf to spend
the coming vacation with him. This was an unusual proposal. Leaves for journeys and
stays outside the Pedagogic Province did exist, chiefly for purposes of study. They were
not so very rare, but were exceptional and generally granted only to older and more
seasoned researchers, never to younger students still at school. But since the invitation
had come from so highly esteemed a family and personage, Headmaster Zbinden did not
presume to reject it on his own, but presented it to a committee of the Board of
Educators. The reply was a laconic refusal. The friends had to say good-by to each other.
"We'll try the invitation again sometime," Plinio said. "Sooner or later it will work
out. You must someday see my home and meet my family, and realize that we are not
just commercial-minded scum. I shall miss you very much. And make sure, Joseph, that
you rise quickly in this complicated Castalia of yours. Of course you're highly suited to
become a member of the hierarchy, but in my opinion more at the top than the bottom of
the heap -- in spite of your name. I prophesy a great future for you; one of these days
you'll be a Magister and be counted among the illustrious."
Joseph gave him a sad look.
"Go ahead and make fun of me," he said, struggling with the emotion of parting.
"I am not so ambitious as you, and if I should ever attain to some office, you will long
since have become president or mayor, university professor, or deputy. Think kindly of
us, Plinio, and of Castalia; don't become entirely estranged from us. After all, there have
to be a few people in the outside world who know more about Castalia than the jokes
they make about us out there."
They shook hands, and Plinio departed.
For his last year in Waldzell, Joseph remained out of the limelight. His exposed
and strenuous function as a more or less public personality had suddenly come to an end.
Castalia no longer needed a defender. Joseph devoted his free time during that year
chiefly to the Glass Bead Game, which enthralled him more and more. A notebook of
jottings from that period, dealing with the meaning and theory of the Game, begins with
the sentence: "The whole of both physical and mental life is a dynamic phenomenon, of
which the Glass Bead Game basically comprehends only the aesthetic side, and does so
predominantly as an image of rhythmic processes."
THREE
YEARS OF FREEDOM
JOSEPH KNECHT WAS about twenty-four years old at this time. With graduation from
Waldzell, his school days were over, and there now began his years of free study. With
the exception of his uneventful boyhood in Eschholz, these were probably the most
serene and happy years of his life. There is, after all, always something wonderful and
touchingly beautiful about a young man, for the first time released from the bonds of
schooling, making his first ventures toward the infinite horizons of the mind. At this point
he has not yet seen any of his illusions dissipated, or doubted either his own capacity for
endless dedication or the boundlessness of the world of thought.
Especially for young men with gifts like those of Joseph Knecht, who have not
been driven by a single talent to concentrate on a specialty, but whose nature rather aims
at integration, synthesis, and universality, this springtide of free study is often a period of
intense happiness and very nearly of intoxication. Were it not preceded by the discipline
of the elite schools, by the psychic hygiene of meditation exercises and the lenient
supervision of the Board of Educators, this freedom would even be dangerous for such
natures and might prove a nemesis to many, as it used to be to innumerable highly gifted
young men in the ages before our present educational pattern was set, in the pre-Castalian
centuries. The universities in those days literally swarmed with young Faustian spirits
who embarked with all sails set upon the high seas of learning and academic freedom,
and ran aground on all the shoals of untrammeled dilettantism. Faust himself, after all,
was the prototype of brilliant amateurishness and its consequent tragedy.
In Castalia, as it happens, the intellectual freedom of the student is infinitely
greater than it ever was at the universities of earlier ages, since the available materials
and opportunities for study are far ampler. Moreover, studies in Castalia are in no way
restricted or colored by material considerations, by ambition, timidity, straitened
circumstances of the parents, prospects for livelihood and career, and so on. In the
academies, seminars, libraries, archives, and laboratories of the Pedagogic Province every
student is completely equal, no matter what his origins and prospects. The hierarchy
grades the student solely by his qualities of mind and character. On the other hand most
of the freedoms, temptations, and dangers to which so many talented youths succumb at
the secular universities simply do not exist in Castalia. Not that there is a dearth of
danger, passion, and bedazzlement there -- how could these elements ever be completely
absent from human life? But at least certain opportunities for going off the rails, for
disappointment and disaster, have been eliminated. There is no danger of the Castalian
student's becoming a drinker. Nor can he waste the years of his youth in tomfoolery, or
the empty braggadocio of secret societies, as did some generations of students in olden
times. Nor is he apt to make the discovery someday that his degree was a mistake, that
there are gaps in his preparatory education which can never be filled. The Castalian order
of things protects him against such blunders.
The danger of wasting himself on women or on losing himself in sports is also
minimal. As far as women are concerned, the Castalian student is not subject to the
temptations and dangers of marriage, nor is he oppressed by the prudery of a good many
past eras which imposed continence on students or else made them turn to more or less
venal and sluttish women. Since there is no marriage for the Castalians, love is not
governed by a morality directed toward marriage. Since the Castalian has no money and
virtually no property, he also cannot purchase love. It is customary in the Province for the
daughters of the citizenry not to marry early, and in the years before marriage they look
upon students and scholars as particularly desirable lovers. The young men, for their part,
are not interested in birth and fortune, are prone to grant at least equal importance to
mental and emotional capacities, are usually endowed with imagination and humor and,
since they have no money, must make their repayment by giving more of themselves than
others would. In Castalia the sweetheart of a student does not ask herself: will he marry
me? She knows he will not. Actually, there have been occasions when he did; every so
often an elite student would return to the world by way of marriage, giving up Castalia
and membership in the Order. But these few, rare cases of apostasy in the history of the
schools and of the Order amount to little more than a curiosity.
After graduation from the preparatory schools the elite student truly enjoys a
remarkable degree of freedom and self-determination in choosing among the fields of
knowledge and research. Unless a student's own talents and interests dictate natural
bounds from the start, the only limit on this freedom is his obligation to present a plan of
study for each semester. The authorities oversee the execution of fhis plan in only the
mildest way. For young men of versatile talents and interests -- and Knecht was one of
these -- the scope thus allowed him is wonderfully enticing and a source of continual
delight. The authorities permit such students, if they do not drift into sheer idleness,
almost paradisiacal freedom. The student may dabble in all sorts of fields, combine the
widest variety of subjects, fall in love with six or eight disciplines simultaneously, or
confine himself to a narrower selection from the beginning. Aside from observing the
general rules of morality that apply to the whole Province and the Order, nothing is asked
of him except presentation once a year of the record of the lectures he has attended, the
books he has read, and the research he has undertaken at the various institutes. His
performance comes in for closer check only when he attends technical courses and
seminars, including courses in the Glass Bead Game and at the Conservatory of Music.
Here every student has to take the official examinations and write the papers or do the
work required by the head of the seminar, as is only natural. But no one forces him to
take such courses. For semesters or for years he may, if he pleases, merely make use of
the libraries and listen to lectures. Students who take a long while before deciding upon a
single field of knowledge thereby delay their admission into the Order, but the authorities
show great patience in allowing and even encouraging their explorations of all possible
disciplines and types of study. Aside from good moral conduct, nothing is required of
them except the composition of a "Life" every year.
It is to this old and much-mocked custom that we owe the three "Lives" by
Knecht written during his years of free study. These were, then, not a purely voluntary
and unofficial, not to say secret and more or less illicit kind of literary activity, such as
his poems written at Waldzell had been, but a normal and official assignment. Far back in
the earliest days of the Pedagogic Province the custom had arisen of requiring the
younger students, those who had not yet been admitted to the Order, to compose from
time to time a special kind of essay or stylistic exercise which was called a "Life." It was
to be a fictitious autobiography set in any period of the past the writer chose. The
student's assignment was to transpose himself back to the surroundings, culture, and
intellectual climate of any earlier era and to imagine himself living a suitable life in that
period. Depending on the times and the fashion, imperial Rome, seventeenth-century
France, or fifteenth-century Italy might be the period most favored, or Periclean Athens
or Austria in the time of Mozart. Among language specialists it had become the custom to
compose their imaginary biographies in the language of the country and the style of the
period in which they were versed. Thus there had been highly ingenious Lives written in
the style of the Papal Curia at Rome around the year 1200, in monastic Latin, in the
Italian of the "Cento Novelle Antiche," in the French of Montaigne, and the baroque
German of Martin Opitz.
A remnant of the ancient Asian doctrine of reincarnation and the transmigration of
souls survived in this playful, highly flexible form. All teachers and students were
familiar with the concept that their present existence might have been preceded by others,
in other bodies, at other times, under other conditions. To be sure they did not believe this
in any strict sense; there was no element of dogma in the idea. Rather, it was an exercise,
a game for the imaginative faculties, to conceive of oneself in different conditions and
surroundings. In writing such Lives students made a stab at a cautious penetration of past
cultures, times, and countries, just as they did in many seminars on stylistics, and in the
Glass Bead Game as well. They learned to regard their own persons as masks, as the
transitory garb of an entelechy. The custom of writing such Lives had its charm, and a
good many solid benefits as well, or it probably would not have endured for so long.
Incidentally, there was a rather considerable number of students who not only
more or less believed in the idea of reincarnation, but also in the truth of their own
fictional Lives. Thus the majority of these imaginary pre-existences were not merely
stylistic exercises and historical studies, but also creations of wishful thinking and exalted
self-portraits. The authors cast themselves as the characters they longed to become. They
portrayed their dream and their ideal. Furthermore, from the pedagogic point of view the
Lives were not a bad idea at all. They provided a legitimate channel for the creative urge
of youth. Although serious, creative literary work had been frowned on for generations,
and replaced partly by scholarship, partly by the Glass Bead Game, youth's artistic
impulse had not been crushed. In these Lives, which were often elaborated into small
novels, it found a permissible means of expression. What is more, while writing these
Lives some of the authors took their first steps into the land of self-knowledge.
Incidentally, the students frequently used their Lives for critical and revolutionary
outbursts on the contemporary world and on Castalia. The teachers usually regarded such
sallies with understanding benevolence. In addition, these Lives were extremely revealing
to the teachers during those periods in which the students enjoyed maximum freedom and
were subject to no close supervision. The compositions often provided astonishingly clear
insight into the intellectual and moral state of the authors.
Three such Lives written by Joseph Knecht have been preserved. We intend to
reproduce their full text, and regard them as possibly the most valuable part of our book.
There is much room for conjecture as to whether he wrote only these three Lives, or
whether there might have been others which have been lost. All we know definitely is
that after Knecht handed in his third, "Indian" Life, the Secretariat of the Board of
Educators suggested that if he wrote any additional Lives he ought to set them in an era
historically closer to the present and more richly documented, and that he should pay
more attention to historical detail. We know from anecdotes and letters that he thereupon
actually engaged in preliminary research for a Life set in the eighteenth century. He cast
himself as a Swabian pastor who subsequently turned from the service of the Church to
music, who had been a disciple of Johann Albrecht Bengel, a friend of Oetinger, and for a
while a guest of Zinzendorf's congregation of Moravian Brethren. We know that he was
reading and taking notes on a quantity of old and often out-of-the-way books on church
organization, Pietism, and Zinzendorf, as well as on the liturgy and church music of the
period. We know also that he was fascinated with Oetinger, the charismatic prelate, and
that he felt genuine love and veneration for Magister Bengel; he went to some pains to
have a photograph made of Bengel's portrait and for a while had the picture standing on
his desk. He also honestly tried to write an account of Zinzendorf, who both intrigued and
repelled him. But in the end he dropped this project, content with what he had learned
from it. He declared that he had lost the capacity for making a Life out of these materials
through having studied the subject from too many angles and accumulated too many
details. In view of this statement, we may justifiably regard the three Lives he did
complete rather as the creations of a poetic spirit than the works of a scholar. In saying
this we do not think we are doing them any injustice.
In addition to the freedom of the student at last permitted to range at will in selfchosen studies, Knecht now enjoyed a different kind of freedom and relaxation. He had
not, after all, been merely a student like all the others; he had not only submitted to the
strict training, the exacting schedules, the careful supervision and scrutiny of the teachers,
in a word to all the rigor of elite schooling. For along with all that, because of his
relationship to Plinio he had borne the far greater strain of a responsibility which had in
part spurred him to the utmost of his potentialities, in part drawn heavily on his energies.
In assuming the role of public advocate of Castalia he had taken on a responsibility that
was really too much for his years and his strength. He had run grave risks, and succeeded
only by applying excessive will power and talent. In fact, without the Music Master's
powerful assistance from afar, he would not have been able to carry his assignment to its
conclusion.
At the end of those unusual years at Waldzell we find him, a young man of
twenty-four, mature beyond his age and somewhat overstrained, but amazingly bearing
no visible traces of damage. But the degree to which his whole nature had been taxed and
brought to the verge of exhaustion is apparent, although there is no direct documentation
for it, from the way he employed the first few years of that freedom he had at last
attained, and for which he had no doubt deeply yearned. Having stood in so conspicuous
a position during his last years at school, he immediately and completely withdrew from
the public eye. Indeed, when we seek the traces of his life at that time, we have the
impression that if he could he would have made himself invisible. No surroundings and
no society seemed undemanding enough for him, no mode of living private enough. For
example, he replied curtly and reluctantly to several long and tempestuous letters from
Designori, then ceased to answer altogether. The famous student Knecht vanished and
could no longer be located; but in Waldzell his fame continued to flower, and in time
became almost a legend.
At the beginning of his years of free study he avoided Waldzell for the reasons
given. This meant that for the time being he eschewed the graduate and postgraduate
courses in the Glass Bead Game. But although to the superficial observer Knecht was
ostentatiously neglecting the Game, we know that on the contrary the entire seemingly
wayward and disconnected, and certainly altogether unusual course of his studies had
been influenced by the Glass Bead Game and led back to it and to the service of the
Game. We mean to discuss this somewhat at length, for this trait was characteristic.
Joseph Knecht employed his freedom for study in the strangest and most idiosyncratic
fashion, one that revealed an astonishing youthful genius. During his years at Waldzell he
had, as was usual, taken the official introduction to the Glass Bead Game and the review
course as well. During his last school year and among his friends he already had the
reputation of being an excellent player. But then he was gripped with such a passion for
this Game of games that after completing another course and while still in school he had
been admitted to a course for players of the second stage, which was a very rare
distinction indeed.
Some years later he told his friend and later assistant, Fritz Tegularius (who had at
school taken the review course along with him) of an experience which not only decided
his destiny as a Glass Bead Game player, but also greatly influenced the course of his
studies. The letter is extant; the passage runs: "Let me remind you of the time the two of
us, assigned to the same group, were so eagerly working on our first sketches for Glass
Bead Games. Do you recall a certain day and a certain game? Our group leader had given
us various suggestions and proposed all sorts of themes for us to choose from. We had
just arrived at the delicate transition from astronomy, mathematics, and physics to the
sciences of language and history, and the leader was a virtuoso in the art of setting traps
for eager beginners like us and luring us on to the thin ice of impermissible abstractions
and analogies. He would slip into our hands tempting baubles taken from etymology and
comparative linguistics, and enjoyed seeing us grab them and come to grief. We counted
Greek quantities until we were worn out, only to feel the rug pulled out from under us
when he suddenly confronted us with the possibility, in fact the necessity, of accentual
instead of a quantitative scansion, and so on. In formal terms he did his job brilliantly,
and quite properly, although I did not like the spirit of it. He showed us false trails and
lured us into faulty conjectures, partly with the good intention of familiarizing us with the
perils, but also a little in order to laugh at us for being such stupid boys and to instil a
heavy dose of skepticism into those of us who were most enthusiastic about the Game.
And yet as things turned out it happened under his instruction and in the course of one of
his complicated trick experiments -- we were timidly and awkwardly trying to sketch a
halfway decent Game problem -- that I was all at once seized by the meaning and the
greatness of our Game, and was shaken by it to the core of my being. We were picking
apart a problem in linguistic history and, as it were, examining close up the peak period
of glory in the history of a language; in minutes we had traced the path which had taken it
several centuries. And I was powerfully gripped by the vision of transitoriness: the way
before our eyes such a complex, ancient, venerable organism, slowly built up over many
generations, reaches its highest point, which already contains the germ of decay, and the
whole intelligently articulated structure begins to droop, to degenerate, to totter toward its
doom. And at the same time the thought abruptly shot through me, with a joyful, startled
amazement, that despite the decay and death of that language it had not been lost, that its
youth, maturity, and downfall were preserved in our memory, in our knowledge of it and
its history, and would survive and could at any time be reconstructed in the symbols and
formulas of scholarship as well as in the recondite formulations of the Glass Bead Game.
I suddenly realized that in the language, or at any rate in the spirit of the Glass Bead
Game, everything actually was all-meaningful, that every symbol and combination of
symbols led not hither and yon, not to single examples, experiments, and proofs, but into
the center, the mystery and innermost heart of the world, into primal knowledge. Every
transition from major to minor in a sonata, every transformation of a myth or a religious
cult, every classical or artistic formulation was, I realized in that flashing moment, if seen
with a truly meditative mind, nothing but a direct route into the interior of the cosmic
mystery, where in the alternation between inhaling and exhaling, between heaven and
earth, between Yin and Yang, holiness is forever being created.
"Of course by that time I had attended many a well-constructed and well-executed
Game. Listening, I had often been exalted and overjoyed by the insights such Games
afforded; but up to that time I had repeatedly been inclined to doubt the real value and
importance of the Game. After all, every neatly solved problem in mathematics could
provide intellectual pleasure; every good piece of music could exalt and expand the soul
toward universality when heard, and even more when played; and every reverent
meditation could soothe the heart and tune it to harmony with the universe. But perhaps
for that very reason, my doubts whispered, the Glass Bead Game was merely a formal art,
a clever skill, a witty combination, so that it would be better not to play this Game, but to
occupy oneself with uncontaminated mathematics and good music.
"But now for the first time I had heard the inner voice of the Game itself, its
meaning. It had reached me and penetrated me, and since that moment I have believed
that our royal game is truly a lingua sacra, a sacred and divine language. You will
remember, for you remarked on it yourself at the time, that a change had taken place
within me, a summons had come to me. I can compare it only to that unforgettable call
which once lifted my heart and transformed my life when as a boy I was tested by the
Magister Musicae and summoned to Castalia. You noticed it; I felt that at the time,
although you said not a word about it. Let us say no more about it today. But now I have
something to ask you, and in order to explain my request I must tell you something that
no one else knows or is to know: that my seemingly disorganized studies at the present
time are not the result of whim, but of a definite underlying plan. You will recall, at least
in general outline, the Glass Bead Game exercise we constructed at that time, as pupils in
the Third Course, and with the leader's assistance -- in the course of which I heard that
voice and experienced my vocation as a lusor. That game began with a rhythmic analysis
of a fugal theme and in the center of it was a sentence attributed to Confucius. Now I am
studying that entire game from beginning to end. That is, I am working through each of
its phrases, translating it from the language of the Game back into its original language,
into mathematics, ornament, Chinese, Greek, and so on. At least this once in my life I
intend to restudy and reconstruct systematically the entire content of a Glass Bead Game.
I have already finished the first part, and it has taken me two years. Of course it is going
to cost me quite a few years more. But since we are granted our famous freedom of study
in Castalia, this is how I mean to use it. I am familiar with the objections to such a
procedure. Most of our teachers would say: We have devoted several centuries to
inventing and elaborating the Glass Bead Game as a universal language and method for
expressing all intellectual concepts and all artistic values and reducing them to a common
denominator. Now you come along and want to check over everything to see if it is
correct. That will take you a lifetime, and you will regret it.
"Well, I shall not take a lifetime and I hope I won't regret it. And now for my
request. Since at present you are working in the Game Archives and I for special reasons
prefer to keep away from Waldzell for a good while longer, I hope you will answer quite
a barrage of questions for me every so often. That is, I shall be asking you to send me
from the Archives the unabbreviated forms of the official clefs and symbols for all sorts
of themes. I am counting on you, and counting on your asking reciprocal favors as soon
as there is anything I can do for you."
Perhaps this is the place to cite that other passage from Knecht's letters which also
deals with the Glass Bead Game, although the letter in question, addressed to the Music
Master, was written at least a year or two later. "I imagine," Knecht wrote to his patron,
"that one can be an excellent Glass Bead Game player, even a virtuoso, and perhaps even
a thoroughly competent Magister Ludi, without having any inkling of the real mystery of
the Game and its ultimate meaning. It might even be that one who does guess or know the
truth might prove a greater danger to the Game, were he to become a specialist in the
Game, or a Game leader. For the dark interior, the esoterics of the Game, points down
into the One and All, into those depths where the eternal Atman eternally breathes in and
out, sufficient unto itself. One who had experienced the ultimate meaning of the Game
within himself would by that fact no longer be a player; he would no longer dwell in the
world of multiplicity and would no longer be able to delight in invention, construction,
and combination, since he would know altogether different joys and raptures. Because I
think I have come close to the meaning of the Glass Bead Game, it will be better for me
and for others if I do not make the Game my profession, but instead shift to music."
The Music Master, who usually confined his correspondence to a minimum, was
evidently troubled by these remarks and replied with a rather lengthy piece of friendly
admonition: "It is good that you yourself do not require a master of the Game to be an
'esoteric' in your sense of the word, for I hope you wrote that without irony. A Game
Master or teacher who was primarily concerned with being close enough to the
'innermost meaning' would be a very bad teacher. To be candid, I myself, for example,
have never in my life said a word to my pupils about the 'meaning' of music; if there is
one, it does not need my explanations. On the other I have always made a great point of
having my pupils count their eighths and sixteenths nicely. Whatever you become,
teacher, scholar, or musician, have respect for the 'meaning,' but do not imagine that it
can be taught. Once upon a time the philosophers of history ruined half of world history
with their efforts to teach such 'meaning'; they inaugurated the Age of the Feuilleton and
are partly to blame for quantities of spilled blood. If I were introducing pupils to Homer
or Greek tragedy, say, I would also not try to tell them that the poetry is one of the
manifestations of the divine, but would endeavor to make the poetry accessible to them
by imparting a precise knowledge of its linguistic and metrical strategies. The task of the
teacher and scholar is to study means, cultivate tradition, and preserve the purity of
methods, not to deal in incommunicable experiences which are reserved to the elect --
who often enough pay a high price for this privilege."
There is no other mention of the Glass Bead Game and its "esoteric" aspect in all
the rest of Knecht's correspondence of that period. Indeed, he does not seem to have
written many letters, or else some of them have been lost. At any rate, the largest and
best-preserved correspondence, that with Ferromonte, deals almost entirely with
problems of music and musical stylistic analysis.
Thus there was a special meaning and resolution behind the peculiar zigzag
course of Knecht's studies, which consisted in nothing less than the circumstantial
retracing and prolonged analysis of a single Game pattern. In order to assimilate the
contents of this one pattern, which the schoolboys had composed as an exercise within a
few days, and which could be read off in a quarter hour in the language of the Glass Bead
Game, he spent year after year sitting in lecture halls and libraries, studying Froberger
and Alessandro Scarlatti, fugues and sonata form, reviewing mathematics, learning
Chinese, working through a system of tonal figuration and the Feustelian theory of the
correspondence between the scale of colors and the musical keys.
We may ask why he had chosen this toilsome, eccentric, and above all lonely
path, for his ultimate goal (outside of Castalia, people would say: his choice of
profession) was undoubtedly the Glass Bead Game. He might freely have entered one of
the institutes of the Vicus Lusorum, the settlement of Glass Bead Game players in
Waldzell, as a guest scholar. In that case all the special studies connected with the Game
would have been made easier for him. Advice and information on all questions of detail
would have been available to him at any time, and in addition he could have pursued his
studies among other scholars in the same field, young men with the same devotion to the
Game, instead of struggling alone in a state that often amounted to voluntary banishment.
Be that as it may, he went his own way. We suspect that he avoided Waldzell partly to
expunge as far as possible from his own mind and the minds of others the memory of his
role as a student there, partly so that he would not stumble into a similar role among the
community of Glass Bead Game players. For he probably bore away the feeling from
those early days that he was predestined to become a leader and spokesman, and he did
all that he could to outwit the obtrusiveness of fate. He sensed in advance the weight of
responsibility; he could already feel it toward his fellow students from Waldzell, who
went on adulating him even though he withdrew from them. And he felt it especially
toward Tegularius, who would go through fire and water for him -- this he knew
instinctively.
Therefore he sought seclusion and contemplation, while his destiny tried to propel
him forward into the public realm. It is in these terms that we imagine his state of mind at
the time. But there was another important factor that deterred him from taking the usual
courses at the higher Glass Bead Game academies and made an outsider of him. That was
an inexorable urge toward research arising from his former doubts about the Glass Bead
Game. To be sure, he had once tasted the experience that the Game could be played in a
supreme and sacred sense; but he had also seen that the majority of players and students
of the Game, and even some of the leaders and teachers, by no means shared that lofty
and sacramental feeling for the Game. They did not regard the Game language as a
lingua sacra, but more as an ingenious kind of stenography. They practiced the Game as
an interesting or amusing specialty, an intellectual sport or an arena for ambition. In fact,
as his letter to the Music Master shows, he already sensed that the search for ultimate
meaning does not necessarily determine the quality of the player, that its superficial
aspects were also essential to the Game, that it comprised technique, science, and social
institution. In short, he had doubts and divided feelings; the Game was a vital question
for him, had become the chief problem of his life, and he was by no means disposed to let
well-meaning spiritual guides ease his struggles or benignly smiling teachers dismiss
them as trivial.
Naturally he could have made any one of the tens of thousands of recorded Glass
Bead Games and the millions of possible games the basis of his studies. He knew this and
therefore proceeded from that chance Game plan that he and his schoolmates had
composed in an elementary course. It was the game in which he had for the first time
grasped the meaning of all Glass Bead Games and experienced his vocation as a player.
During those years he kept with him at all times an outline of that Game, noted down in
the usual shorthand. In the symbols, ciphers, signatures, and abbreviations of the Game
language an astronomical formula, the principles of form underlying an old sonata, an
utterance of Confucius, and so on, were written down. A reader who chanced to be
ignorant of the Glass Bead Game might imagine such a Game pattern as rather similar to
the pattern of a chess game, except that the significances of the pieces and the
potentialities of their relationships to one another and their effect upon one another
multiplied manyfold and an actual content must be ascribed to each piece, each
constellation, each chess move, of which this move, configuration, and so on is the
symbol.
Knecht's studies went beyond the task of acquainting himself in the utmost detail
with the contents, principles, books, and systems contained in the Game plan, and
retracting as he went a way back through various cultures, sciences, languages, arts, and
centuries. He had also set himself the task that none of his teachers even recognized, of
employing these objects to check in detail the systems and possibilities of expression in
the art of the Glass Bead Game.
To anticipate his results: here and there he found a gap, an inadequacy, but on the
whole our Glass Bead Game withstood his stringent reassessment. Otherwise he would
not have returned to it at the end of his work.
If we were writing a study in cultural history, a good many of the places and
scenes of Knecht's student days would certainly merit description. As far as possible he
preferred places where he could work alone, or with only a very few others, and to some
of these places he retained a lifelong grateful attachment. He frequently stayed in
Monteport, sometimes as the Music Master's guest, sometimes as a participant in a
musicological seminar. Twice we find him in Hirsland, the headquarters of the Order, as
a participant in the "Great Exercise," the twelve-day period of fasting and meditation. He
used later to tell his intimates with special affection about the "Bamboo Grove," the
lovely hermitage which was the scene of his I Ching studies. There he learned and
experienced things of crucial importance. There, too, guided by a wonderful premonition
or Providence, he found unique surroundings and an extraordinary person: the founder
and inmate of the Chinese hermitage, who was called Elder Brother. We think it proper to
describe at greater length this most remarkable episode in his years of free study.
Knecht had begun his studies of the Chinese language and classics in the famous
Far Eastern College which for generations had been affiliated to St. Urban's, the
academic complex devoted to classical philology. There he had made rapid progress in
reading and writing and also struck up friendships with several of the Chinese working
there, and had learned a number of the odes of the Shih Ching by heart. In the second
year of his stay he turned to a more and more intense study of the I Ching, the Book of
Changes. The Chinese provided him with all sorts of information, but no introductory
course; there was no teacher available in the college, and after Knecht had repeatedly
petitioned them for an instructor for a thorough study of the I Ching, he was told about
Elder Brother and his hermitage.
It had become apparent to Knecht that his interest in the Book of Changes was
leading him into a field which the teachers at the college preferred to keep at a distance,
and he therefore grew more cautious in his inquiries. Now, as he made efforts to obtain
further information about this legendary Elder Brother, it became obvious to him that the
hermit enjoyed a measure of respect, and indeed a degree of fame, but more as an
eccentric loner than as a scholar. Knecht sensed that he would have to help himself; he
finished a paper he had begun for a seminar as quickly as possible, and took his leave. On
foot, he made his way to the region in which the mysterious man, perhaps a sage and
Master, perhaps a fool, had long ago established his Bamboo Grove.
He had gathered a few bits of information about the hermit. Some twenty-five
years before, the man had been the most promising student in the Chinese Department.
He seemed to have been born for these studies, outdid his best teachers, both Chinese by
birth and Westerners, in the technique of brush writing and the deciphering of ancient
texts, but became somewhat notorious for the zeal with which he also tried to make
himself into a Chinese in outward matters also. Thus he obstinately refused to address his
superiors, from the instructor of a seminar to the Masters, by their titles, as all other
students did. Instead, he called them "My Elder Brother," until at last this appellation
became attached to himself as a nickname. He devoted special attention to the oracular
game of the I Ching, and developed a masterly skill at practicing it with the traditional
yarrow stalks. Along with the ancient commentaries on the Book of Changes, his favorite
book was the philosophical work of Chuang Tzu. Evidently the rationalistic, somewhat
antimystical, and declaredly Confucian spirit of the Chinese Department of the college, as
Knecht encountered it, had already been prevalent at that time, for one day Elder Brother
left the Institute, which would gladly have kept him as a teacher, and set out on a walking
tour, armed with brush, Chinese ink saucer, and two or three books. He made his way to
the southern part of the country, turning up here and there to visit for a while with
brethren of the Order. He looked for and finally found the suitable spot for the hermitage
he planned, stubbornly bombarded both the secular authorities and the Order with
written and oral petitions until they granted him the right to settle there and cultivate
the area. Ever since, he had been living in an idyllic retreat strictly governed by ancient
Chinese principles. Some referred to him with amusement as a crank, others venerated
him as a kind of saint. But apparently he was content with himself and at peace with the
world, devoting his days to meditation and the copying of ancient scrolls whenever he
was not occupied with his Bamboo Grove, which sheltered from the north wind a
carefully laid out Chinese miniature garden.
Joseph Knecht, then, tramped toward this hermitage, making frequent stops to
rest, delighting in the landscape that lay smiling beneath him as soon as he had climbed
through the mountain passes, stretching southward in a blue haze, with sunlit terraced
vineyards, brown stone walls alive with lizards, stately chestnut groves, a piquant
mingling of southland and high mountain country. It was late afternoon when he reached
the Bamboo Grove. He entered and looked with astonishment upon a Chinese pavilion set
in the midst of a curious garden, with a splashing fountain fed by a wooden pipe. The
overflow ran along a gravel bed into a masonry basin, in whose crevices all sorts of green
plants flourished. A few goldfish swam around in the still, crystalline water. Fragile and
peaceful, the feathery crowns of the bamboos swayed on their strong, slender shafts. The
sward was punctuated by stone slabs carved with inscriptions in the classical style.
A frail man dressed in tan linen, glasses over blue eyes that bore a tentative look,
straightened up from a flower bed over which he had been bending and slowly
approached the visitor. His manner was not unfriendly, but it had that somewhat
awkward shyness rather common among solitaries and recluses. He looked inquiringly at
Knecht and waited for what he had to say. With some embarrassment Knecht spoke the
Chinese words he had already formulated: "The young disciple takes the liberty of paying
his respects to Elder Brother."
"The well-bred guest is welcome," Elder Brother said. "May a young colleague
always be welcome to a bowl of tea and a little agreeable conversation; and a bed for the
night may be found for him, if this is desired."
Knecht kowtowed, expressed his thanks, and was led into the pavilion and served
tea. Then he was shown the garden, the carved slabs, the pond, the goldfish, and was
even told the age of the fish. Until suppertime they sat under the swaying bamboos
exchanging courtesies, verses from odes, and sayings from the classical writers. They
looked at the flowers and took pleasure in the fading pinks of sunset along the mountain
ranges. Then they re-entered the house. Elder Brother served bread and fruit, cooked an
excellent pancake for each of them on a tiny stove, and after they had eaten he asked in
German the purpose of his visit, and in German Knecht explained why he had come and
what he desired, which was to stay as long as Elder Brother permitted him, and to
become his disciple.
"We shall discuss that tomorrow," the hermit said, and showed his guest to a bed.
Next morning Knecht sat down by the goldfish pool and gazed into the cool small
world of darkness and light and magically shimmering colors, where the bodies of the
golden fish glided in the dark greenish blueness and inky blackness. Now and then, just
when the entire world seemed enchanted, asleep forever in a dreamy spell, the fish would
dart with a supple and yet alarming movement, like flashes of crystal and gold, through
the somnolent darkness. He looked down, becoming more and more absorbed,
daydreaming rather than meditating, and was not conscious when Elder Brother stepped
softly out of the house, paused, and stood for a long time watching his bemused guest.
When Knecht at last shook off his abstraction and stood up, he was no longer there, but
his voice soon called from inside an invitation to tea. They greeted each other briefly,
drank tea, and sat listening in the matutinal stillness to the sound of the small jet of water
from the fountain, a melody of eternity. Then the hermit stood up, busied himself here
and there about the irregularly shaped room, now and then glancing, blinking rapidly, at
Knecht. Suddenly he asked: "Are you ready to don your shoes and continue your
journeying?"
Knecht hesitated. Then he said: "If it must be so, I am ready."
"And if it should chance that you stay here a little while, are you ready to be
obedient and to keep as still as a goldfish?"
Again Knecht said he was ready.
"It is well," Elder Brother said. "Now I shall lay the stalks and consult the oracle."
While Knecht sat and looked on with an awe equal to his curiosity, keeping "as
still as a goldfish," Elder Brother fetched from a wooden beaker, which was rather a kind
of quiver, a handful of sticks. These were the yarrow stalks. He counted them out
carefully, returned one part of the bundle to the vessel, laid a stalk aside, divided the rest
into two equal bundles, kept one in his left hand, and with the sensitive fingertips of his
right hand took tiny little clusters from the pack in his left. He counted these and laid
them aside until only a few stalks remained. These he held between two fingers of his left
hand. After thus reducing one bundle by ritual counting to a few stalks, he followed the
same procedure with the other bundle. He laid the counted stalks to one side, then went
through both bundles again, one after the other, counting, clamping small remnants of
bundles between two fingers. His fingers performed all this with economical motions and
quiet agility; it looked like an occult game of skill governed by strict rules, practiced
thousands of times and brought to a high degree of virtuoso dexterity. After he had gone
through the same process several times, three small bundles remained. From the number
of stalks in them he read an ideograph which he drew with a tapering brush on a small
piece of paper. Now the whole complicated procedure began anew; the sticks were
divided again into two equal bundles, counted, laid aside, thrust between fingers, until in
the end again three tiny bundles remained which resulted in a second ideograph. Moved
about like dancers, making very soft, dry clicks, the stalks came together, changed places,
formed bundles, were separated, were counted anew; they shifted positions rhythmically,
with a ghostly sureness. At the end of each process an ideograph was written, until finally
the positive and negative symbols stood in six lines one above the other. The stalks were
gathered up and carefully replaced in their container. The sage sat crosslegged on the
floor of reed matting, for a long time silently examining the result of the augury on the
sheet of paper.
"It is the sign Mong," he said. "This sign bears the name: youthful folly. Above
the mountain, below the water; above Gen, below Kan. At the foot of the fountain the
spring bubbles forth, the symbol of youth. The verdict reads:
Youthful folly wins success.
I do not seek the young fool,
The young fool seeks me.
At the first oracle I give knowledge.
If he asks again, it is importunity.
If he importunes, I give no knowledge.
Perseverance is beneficial."
Knecht had been holding his breath from sheer suspense. In the ensuing silence he
involuntarily gave a deep sigh of relief. He did not dare to ask. But he thought he had
understood: the young fool had turned up; he would be permitted to stay. Even while he
was still enthralled by the sublime marionettes' dance of fingers and sticks, which he had
watched for so long and which looked so persuasively meaningful, the result took hold of
him. The oracle had spoken; it had decided in his favor.
We would not have described this episode in such detail if Knecht himself had not
so frequently related it to his friends with a certain relish. Now we shall return to our
scholarly account.
Knecht remained at the Bamboo Grove for months and learned to manipulate the
yarrow stalks almost as well as his teacher. The latter spent an hour a day with him,
practicing counting the sticks, imparting the grammar and symbolism of the oracular
language, and drilling him in writing and memorizing the sixty-four signs. He read to
Knecht from ancient commentaries, and every so often, on particularly good days, told
him a story by Chuang Tzu. For the rest, the disciple learned to tend the garden, wash the
brushes, and prepare the Chinese ink. He also learned to make soup and tea, gather
brushwood, observe the weather, and handle the Chinese calendar. But his rare attempts
to introduce the Glass Bead Game and music into their sparing conversations yielded no
results whatsoever; they seemed to fall upon deaf ears, or else were turned aside with a
forbearing smile or a proverb such as, "Dense clouds, no rain," or, "Nobility is without
flaw." But when Knecht had a small clavichord sent from Monteport and spent an hour a
day playing, Elder Brother made no objection. Once Knecht confessed to his teacher that
he wished to learn enough to be able to incorporate the system of the I Ching into the
Glass Bead Game. Elder Brother laughed. "Go ahead and try," he exclaimed. "You'll see
how it turns out. Anyone can create a pretty little bamboo garden in the world. But I
doubt that the gardener would succeed in incorporating the world in his bamboo grove."
But enough of this. We shall mention only the one further fact that some years
later, when Knecht was already a highly respected personage in Waldzell and invited
Elder Brother to give a course there, he received no answer.
Afterward Joseph Knecht described the months he lived in the Bamboo Grove as
an unusually happy time. He also frequently referred to it as the "beginning of my
awakening" -- and in fact from that period on the image of "awakening" turns up more
and more often in his remarks, with a meaning similar to although not quite the same as
that he had formerly attributed to the image of vocation. It could be assumed that the
"awakening" signified knowledge of himself and of the place he occupied within the
Castalian and the general human order of things; but it seems to us that the accent
increasingly shifts toward self-knowledge in the sense that from the "beginning of his
awakening" Knecht came closer and closer to a sense of his special, unique position and
destiny, while at the same time, the concepts and categories of the traditional hierarchy of
the world and of the special Castalian hierarchy became for him more and more relative
matters.
His Chinese studies were far from concluded during his stay in the Bamboo
Grove. They continued, and Knecht made particular efforts to acquire a knowledge of
ancient Chinese music. Everywhere in the older Chinese writers he encountered praise of
music as one of the primal sources of all order, morality, beauty, and health. This broad,
ethical view of music was familiar to him from of old, for the Music Master could be
regarded as the very embodiment of it
Without ever forsaking the fundamental plan of his studies, which as we have
seen he outlined in his letter to Fritz Tegularius, he pushed forward energetically on a
broad front wherever he scented an element of essential value to himself, that is to say,
wherever the path of "awakening," on which he had already set out, seemed to lead him.
One of the positive results of his period of apprenticeship with Elder Brother was that he
overcame his resistance against returning to Waldzell. Henceforth he participated in one
of the advanced courses there every year, and without quite realizing how it had
happened he became a personage regarded with interest and esteem in the Vicus
Lusorum. He belonged to that central and most sensitive organ of the entire Game
organization, that anonymous group of players of proven worth in whose hands lay the
destinies of the Game at any given time, or at least the type of play that happened to be in
fashion.
Officials of the Game institutes belonged to but did not dominate this group,
which usually met in several remote, quiet rooms of the Game Archives. There the
members beguiled their time with critical studies of the Game, championing the inclusion
of new subject areas, or arguing for their exclusion, debating for or against certain
constantly shifting tastes in regard to the form, the procedures, the sporting aspects of the
Glass Bead Game. Everyone who had made a place for himself in this group was a
virtuoso of the Game; each knew to a hair the talents and peculiarities of all the others.
The atmosphere was like that in the corridors of a government ministry or an aristocratic
club where the rulers and those who will take over their responsibilities in the near future
meet and get to know one another. A muted, polished tone prevailed in this group. Its
members were ambitious without showing it, keen-eyed and critical to excess. Many in
Castalia, and some in the rest of the country outside the Province, regarded this elite as
the ultimate flower of Castalian tradition, the cream of an exclusive intellectual
aristocracy, and a good many youths dreamed for years of some day belonging to it
themselves. To others, however, this elect circle of candidates for the higher reaches in
the hierarchy of the Glass Bead Game seemed odious and debased, a clique of haughty
idlers, brilliant but spoiled geniuses who lacked all feeling for life and reality, an arrogant
and fundamentally parasitic company of dandies and climbers who had made a silly
game, a sterile self-indulgence of the mind, their vocation and the content of their life.
Knecht was untouched by either of these attitudes. It did not matter to him
whether he figured in student gossip as some sort of phenomenon or as a parvenu and
climber. What was important to him were his studies, all of which now centered around
the Game. Another preoccupation was, perhaps, that one question of whether the Game
really was the supreme achievement of Castalia and worth devoting one's life to. For even
as he was familiarizing himself with the ever more recondite mysteries of the Game's
laws and potentialities, even as he became more and more at home in the labyrinths of the
Archives and the complex inner world of the Game's symbolism, his doubts had by no
means been silenced. He had already learned by experience that faith and doubt belong
together, that they govern each other like inhaling and exhaling, and that his very
advances in all aspects of the Game's mirocosm naturally sharpened his eyes to all the
dubiousness of the Game. For a little while, perhaps, the idyll in the Bamboo Grove had
reassured him, or perhaps one might say confused him. The example of Elder Brother had
shown him that there were ways of escaping from this dubiousness. It was possible, for
example, as that recluse had done, to turn oneself into a Chinese, shut oneself off behind
a garden hedge, and live in a self-sufficient and beautiful kind of perfection. One might
also become a Pythagorean or a monk and scholastic -- but these were still escapes,
renunciations of universality possible and permissible only to a few. They involved
renunciation of the present and the future in favor of something perfect enough, but past.
Knecht had sensed in good time that this type of escape was not the way for him. But
what then was the way for him? Aside from his great talent for music and for the Glass
Bead Game, he was aware of still other forces within himself, a certain inner
independence, a self-reliance which by no means barred him or hampered him from
serving, but demanded of him that he serve only the highest master. And this strength,
this independence, this self-reliance, was not just a trait in his character, it was not just
inturned and effective only upon himself; it also affected the outside world.
As early as his years at school, and especially during the period of his contest with
Plinio Designori, Joseph Knecht had often noticed that many schoolmates his own age,
but even more the younger boys, liked him, sought his friendship, and moreover tended
to let him dominate them. They asked him for advice, put themselves under his influence.
Ever since, this experience had been repeated frequently. It had its pleasant and flattering
side; it satisfied ambition and strengthened self-confidence. But it also had another, a
dark and terrifying side. For there was something bad and unpalatable about the attitude
one took toward these schoolmates so eager for advice, guidance, and an example, about
the impulse to despise them for their lack of self-reliance and dignity, and about the
occasional secret temptation to make them (at least in thought) into obedient slaves.
Moreover, during the time with Plinio he had had a taste of the responsibility, strain, and
psychological burden which is the price paid for every brilliant and publicly
representative position. He knew also that the Music Master sometimes felt weighed
down by his own position. It was lovely, and tempting, to exert power over men and to
shine before others, but power also had its perditions and perils. History, after all,
consisted of an unbroken succession of rulers, leaders, bosses, and commanders who
with extremely rare exceptions had all begun well and ended badly. All of them, at least
so they said, had striven for power for the sake of the good; afterward they had become
obsessed and numbed by power and loved it for its own sake.
What he must do was to sanctify and make wholesome the power Nature had
bestowed on him by placing it in the service of the hierarchy. This was something he had
always taken for granted. But where was his rightful place, where would his energies be
put to best use and bear fruit? The capacity to attract and more or less to influence others,
especially those younger than himself, would of course have been useful to an army
officer or a politician; but in Castalia there was no place for such occupations. Here these
qualities were useful only to the teacher and educator, but Knecht felt hardly drawn to
such work. If it had been a question of his own desires alone, he would have preferred the
life of the independent scholar to all others -- or else that of a Glass Bead Game player.
And in reaching this conclusion he once more faced the old, tormenting question: was
this game really the highest, really the sovereign in the realm of the intellect? Was it not,
in spite of everything and everyone, in the end merely a game after all? Did it really merit
full devotion, lifelong service? Generations ago this famous Game had begun as a kind of
substitute for art, and for many it was gradually developing into a kind of religion,
allowing highly trained intellects to indulge in contemplation, edification, and devotional
exercises.
Obviously, the old conflict between aesthetics and ethics was going on in Knecht.
The question never fully expressed but likewise never entirely suppressed, was the very
one that had now and then erupted, dark and threatening, from beneath the surface of the
schoolboy poems he had written in Waldzell. That question was addressed not just to the
Glass Bead Game, but to Castalia as a whole.
There was a period when this whole complex of problems troubled him so deeply
that he was always dreaming of debates with Designori. And one day, as he was strolling
across one of the spacious courtyards of the Waldzell Players' Village, he heard someone
behind him calling his name. The voice sounded very familiar, although he did not
recognize it at once. When he turned around he saw a tall young man with a trim beard
rushing tempestuously toward him. It was Plinio, and with a surge of affection and warm
memories, Joseph greeted him heartily. They arranged to meet that evening. Plinio, who
had long ago finished his studies at the universities in the outside world and was already a
government official, had come to Waldzell on holiday for a short guest course in the
Glass Bead Game, as he had in fact done once before, several years earlier.
The evening they spent together, however, proved an embarrassment to both
friends. Plinio was here as a guest student, a tolerated dilettante from outside; although he
was pursuing his course with great eagerness, it was nevertheless a course for outsiders
and amateurs. The distance between them was too great; he was facing a professional, an
initiate whose very delicacy and polite interest in his friend's enthusiasm for the Glass
Bead Game inevitably made him feel that he was not a colleague but a child playfully
dabbling on the outer edges of a science which the other understood to its very core.
Knecht tried to turn the conversation away from the Game by asking Plinio about his
official functions and his life on the outside. And now Joseph was the laggard and the
child who asked innocent questions and was tactfully tutored. Plinio had gone into law,
was seeking political influence, and was about to become engaged to the daughter of a
party leader. He spoke a language that Joseph only half understood; many recurrent
expressions sounded empty to him, or seemed to have no content. At any rate he realized
that Plinio counted for something in his world, knew his way about in it, and had
ambitious aims. But the two worlds, which ten years ago both youths had each touched
with tentative curiosity and a measure of sympathy, had by now grown irreconcilably
apart.
Joseph could appreciate the fact that this man of the world and politician had
retained a certain attachment to Castalia. This was, after all, the second time he was
sacrificing a holiday to the Glass Bead Game. But in the end, Joseph thought, it was
pretty much the same as if he were one day to pay a visit to Plinio's district and attend a
few sessions of the court as a curious guest, and have Plinio show him through a few
factories or welfare institutions. Both were disappointed. Knecht found his former friend
coarse and superficial. Designori, for his part, found his former schoolmate distinctly
haughty in his exclusive esotericism and intellectuality; he seemed to Plinio to have
become a "pure intellect" altogether absorbed by himself and his sport.
Both made an effort, however, and Designori had all sorts of tales to tell, about
his studies and examinations, about journeys to England and to the south, political
meetings, parliament. At one point, moreover, he said something that sounded like a
threat or a warning. "You will see," he said. "Soon there will be times of unrest, perhaps
wars, in which case your whole existence in Castalia might well come under attack."
Joseph did not take this too seriously. He merely asked: "And what about you,
Plinio? In that case would you be for or against Castalia?"
"Oh that," Plinio said with a forced smile. "It's not likely that I'd be asked my
opinion. But of course I favor the undisturbed continuance of Castalia; otherwise I
wouldn't be here, you know. Still and all, although your material requirements are so
modest, Castalia costs the country quite a little sum every year."
"Yes," Joseph said, laughing, "it amounts, I am told, to about a tenth of what our
country used to spend annually for armaments during the Century of Wars."
They met several more times, and the closer the end of Plinio's course
approached, the more assiduous they became in courtesies toward each other. But it was a
relief to both when the two or three weeks were over and Plinio departed.
The Magister Ludi at that time was Thomas von der Trave, a famous, widely
traveled, and cosmopolitan man, gracious and obliging toward everyone who approached
him, but severe to the point of fanaticism in guarding the Game against contamination.
He was a great worker, something unsuspected by those who knew him only in his public
role, dressed in his festive robes to conduct the great Games, or receiving delegations
from abroad. He was said to be a cool, even icy rationalist, whose relationship to the arts
was one of mere distant civility. Among the young and ardent amateurs of the Glass Bead
Game, rather deprecatory opinions of him could be heard at times -- misjudgments, for if
he was not an enthusiast and in the great public games tended to avoid touching on grand
and exciting themes, the brilliant construction and unequalled form of his games proved
to the cognoscenti his total grasp of the subtlest problems of the Game's world.
One day the Magister Ludi sent for Joseph Knecht. He received him in his home,
in everyday clothes, and asked whether he would care to come for half an hour every day
at this same time for the next few days. Knecht, who had never before had any private
dealings with the Master, was somewhat astonished.
For the present, the Master showed him a bulky memorandum, a proposal he had
received from an organist -- one of the innumerable proposals which the directorate of the
Game regularly had to examine. Usually these were suggestions for the admission of new
material to the Archives. One man, for example, had made a meticulous study of the
history of the madrigal and discovered in the development of the style a curve that he had
expressed both musically and mathematically, so that it could be included in the
vocabulary of the Game. Another had examined the rhythmic structure of Julius Caesar's
Latin and discovered the most striking congruences with the results of well-known
studies of the intervals in Byzantine hymns. Or again some fanatic had once more
unearthed some new cabala hidden in the musical notation of the fifteenth century. Then
there were the tempestuous letters from abstruse experimenters who could arrive at the
most astounding conclusions from, say, a comparison of the horoscopes of Goethe and
Spinoza; such letters often included pretty and seemingly enlightening geometric
drawings in several colors.
Knecht attacked the manuscript with eagerness. He himself, after all, had often
pondered such proposals, although he had never submitted any. Every active Glass Bead
Game player naturally dreams of a constant expansion of the fields of the Game until
they include the entire universe. Or rather, he constantly performs such expansions in his
imagination and his private Games, and cherishes the secret desire for the ones which
seem to prove their viability to be crowned by official acceptance. The true and ultimate
finesse in the private Games of advanced players consists, of course, in their developing
such mastery over the expressive, nomenclatural, and formative factors of the Game that
they can inject individual and original ideas into any given Game played with objective
historical materials. A distinguished botanist once whimsically expressed the idea in an
aphorism: "The Glass Bead Game should admit of everything, even that a single plant
should chat in Latin with Linnaeus."
Knecht, then, helped the Magister analyze the suggestion. The half-hour passed
swiftly. He came punctually the next day, and so for two weeks came daily for a halfhour session with the Magister Ludi. During the first few days it struck him that the
Master was asking him to work carefully and critically through altogether inferior
memoranda, whose uselessness was evident at first glance. He wondered that the Master
had time for this sort of thing, and gradually became aware that the purpose was not just
to lighten the Master's work load. Rather, this assignment, although necessary in itself,
was giving the Master a chance to subject him, the young adept, to an extremely
courteous but stringent examination. What was taking place was rather similar to the
appearance of the Music Master in his boyhood; he suddenly became aware of it now by
the behavior of his associates, who treated him more shyly, reservedly, and sometimes
with ironic respect. Something was in the wind; he sensed it; but now it was far less a
source of joy than it had been then.
After the last of these sessions the Magister Ludi said in his rather high, courteous
voice and in that carefully enunciated speech of his, but without the slightest solemnity:
"Very well; you need not come tomorrow. Our business is completed for the moment.
But I shall soon be having to trouble you again. Many thanks for your collaboration; it
has been valuable to me. Incidentally, in my opinion you ought to apply for your
admission to the Order now. There will be no difficulties; I have already informed the
heads of the Order." As he rose he added: "One word more, just by the way. Probably
you too sometimes incline, as most good Glass Bead Game players do in their youth, to
use our Game as a kind of instrument for philosophizing. My words alone will not cure
you of that, but nevertheless I shall say them: Philosophizing should be done only with
legitimate tools, those of philosophy. Our Game is neither philosophy nor religion; it is a
discipline of its own, in character most akin to art. It is an art sui generis. One makes
greater strides if one holds to that view from the first than if one reaches it only after a
hundred failures. The philosopher Kant -- he is little known today, but he was a
formidable thinker -- once said that theological philosophizing was 'a magic lantern of
chimeras.' We should not make our Glass Bead Game into that."
Joseph was surprised. His excitement was so great that he almost failed to hear
the last cautionary remarks. It had flashed through his mind that this meant the end of his
freedom, the completion of his period of study, admission to the Order, and his imminent
enrollment in the ranks of the hierarchy. He expressed his thanks with a low bow, and
went promptly to the secretariat of the Order in Waldzell, where sure enough he found
himself already inscribed on the list of new nominees to the Order. Like all students at his
level, he knew the rules of the Order fairly well, and remembered that the ceremony of
admission could be performed by every member of the Order who held an official post in
the higher ranks. He therefore requested that this be done by the Music Master, obtained
a pass and a short furlough, and next day set out for Monteport, where his patron and
friend was staying. He found the venerable old Master ailing, but was welcomed with
rejoicing.
"You have come just in time," the old man said. "Soon I would no longer be
empowered to receive you into the Order as a younger brother. I am about to resign my
office; my release has already been granted."
The ceremony itself was simple. On the following day the Music Master invited
two brothers of the Order to be present as witnesses, as prescribed by the statutes.
Previously, he had given Knecht a paragraph from the rules as the subject of a meditation
exercise. It was the familiar passage: "If the high Authority appoints you to an office,
know this: every step upward on the ladder of offices is not a step into freedom but into
bondage. The higher the office, the tighter the bondage. The greater the power of the
office, the stricter the service. The stronger the personality, the less self-will."
The group then assembled in the Magister's music cell, the same in which Knecht
had long ago been introduced to the art of meditation. The Master called upon the novice,
in honor of the initiation, to play a chorale prelude by Bach. Then one of the witnesses
read aloud the abbreviated version of the rules of the Order, and the Music Master
himself asked the ritual questions and received his young friend's oath. He accorded
Joseph another hour; they sat in the garden and the Master advised him on how to
identify himself with the rules and live by them. "It is good," he said, "that at the moment
I am departing you are stepping into the breach; it is as if I had a son who will stand in
my stead." And when he saw Joseph's sad look he added: "Come now, don't be downcast.
I'm not. I am very tired and looking forward to the leisure I mean to enjoy, and which you
will share with me frequently, I hope. And next time we meet, use the familiar pronoun
of address to me. I could not offer that as long as I held office." He dismissed him with
that winning smile which Joseph had now known for twenty years.
Knecht returned quickly to Waldzell, for he had been given only three days leave.
He was barely back when the Magister Ludi sent for him, greeted him affably as one
colleague to another, and congratulated him on his admission to the Order. "All that is
now lacking to make us completely colleagues and associates," he continued, "is your
assignment to a definite place in our organization."
Joseph was somewhat taken aback. So this would be the end of his freedom.
"Oh," he said timidly, "I hope I can prove useful in some modest spot somewhere.
But to be candid with you, I had been hoping I would be able to continue studying freely
for a while longer."
The Magister looked straight into his eyes with a faintly ironic smile. "You say 'a
while,' but how long is that?"
Knecht gave an embarrassed laugh. "I really don't know."
"So I thought," the Master said. "You are still speaking the language of students
and thinking in student terms, Joseph Knecht. That is quite all right now, but soon it will
no longer be all right, for we need you. Besides, you know that later on, even in the
highest offices of our Order, you can obtain leaves for purposes of study, if you can
persuade the authorities of the value of these studies. My predecessor and teacher, for
example, while he was still Magister Ludi and an old man, requested and received a full
year's furlough for studies in the London Archives. But he received his furlough not for 'a
while,' but for a specific number of months, weeks, and days. Henceforth you will have to
count on that. And now I have a proposal to make to you. We need a reliable man who is
as yet unknown outside our circle for a special mission."
The assignment was the following. The Benedictine monastery of Mariafels, one
of the oldest centers of learning in the country, which maintained friendly relations with
Castalia and in particular had favored the Glass Bead Game for decades, had asked him
to send a young teacher for a prolonged stay, to give introductory courses in the Game
and also to stimulate the few advanced players in the monastery. The Magister's choice
had fallen upon Joseph Knecht. That was why he had been so discreetly tested; that was
why his entry into the Order had been accelerated.
FOUR
TWO ORDERS
IN A GOOD many respects Joseph Knecht's situation was once again similar to that
in his Latin school days after the Music Master's visit. Joseph himself would scarcely
have imagined that the appointment to Mariafels represented a special distinction and a
large first step on the ladder of the hierarchy, but he was after all a good deal wiser about
such matters nowadays and could plainly read the significance of his summons in the
attitude and conduct of his fellow students. Of course he had belonged for some time to
the innermost circle within the elite of the Glass Bead Game players, but now the unusual
assignment marked him to all and sundry as a young man whom the superiors had their
eye on and whom they intended to employ. His associates and ambitious fellow players
did not exactly withdraw or become unfriendly -- the members of this highly aristocratic
group were far too well-mannered for that -- but an aloofness nevertheless arose.
Yesterday's friend might well be tomorrow's superior, and this circle registered and
expressed such gradations and differentiations by the most delicate shades of behavior.
One exception was Fritz Tegularius, whom we may well call, next to Ferromonte,
Joseph Knecht's closest friend throughout his life. Tegularius, destined by his gifts for the
highest achievements but severely hampered by certain deficiencies of health, balance,
and self-confidence, was the same age as Knecht at the time of Knecht's admission to the
Order -- that is, about thirty-four -- and had first met him some ten years earlier in a Glass
Bead Game course. At the time Knecht had sensed how strong an attraction he exerted
upon this quiet and rather melancholy youth. With that psychological instinct which he
possessed even then, although without precisely knowing it, he likewise grasped the
essence of this love on the part of Tegularius. It was friendship ready for unconditional
devotion, a respect capable of the utmost subordination. It was imbued with an almost
religious fervor, but overshadowed and held in bounds by an aristocratic reserve and a
foreboding of inner tragedy. In the beginning, still shaken and oversensitive, not to say
suspicious, as a result of the Designori episode, Knecht had held Tegularius at a distance
by consistent sternness, although he too felt drawn to this interesting and unusual
schoolfellow. For a characterization of Tegularius we may use a page from Knecht's
confidential memoranda which, years later, he regularly drew up for the exclusive use of
the highest authorities. It reads:
"Tegularius. Personal friend of the writer. Recipient of several honors at school in
Keuperheim. Good classical philologist, strong interest in philosophy, worked on
Leibniz, Bolzano, subsequently Plato. The most brilliant and gifted Glass Bead Game
player I know. He would be predestined for Magister Ludi were it not that his character,
together with his frail health, make him completely unsuited for that position. T. should
never be appointed to an outstanding, representative, or organizational position; that
would be a misfortune for him and for the office. His deficiency takes physical form in
states of low vitality, periods of insomnia and nervous aches, psychologically in spells of
melancholy, a hunger for solitude, fear of duties and responsibilities, and probably also in
thoughts of suicide. Dangerous though his situation is, by the aid of meditation and great
self-discipline he keeps himself going so courageously that most of his acquaintances
have no idea of how severely he suffers and are aware only of his great shyness and
taciturnity. But although T. unfortunately is not fitted for higher posts, he is nevertheless
a jewel in the Vicus Lusorum, an altogether irreplaceable treasure. He has mastered the
technique of our game like a great musician his instrument; he instinctively finds the
most delicate nuances, and is also an exceptional instructor. In the advanced and highest
review courses -- for my part he would be wasted in the lower ones -- I could scarcely
manage without him any longer. The way he analyzes the specimen Games of boys
without ever discouraging them, the way he detects their tricks, infallibly recognizes and
exposes everything imitative or purely decorative, the way he finds the sources of error in
a Game that has started well but then gone astray, and lays these errors bare like
flawlessly prepared anatomical specimens -- is altogether unique. It is this sharp and
incorruptible talent for analysis and correction that assures him the respect of students
and colleagues, which otherwise might have been jeopardized by his unstable demeanor
and shyness.
"I should like to cite an example to illustrate T.'s brilliance as a Glass Bead Game
player. During the early days of my friendship with him, when both of us were already
finding little more to learn by way of technique in our courses, he once -- it was a
moment of unusual trust -- allowed me to look at several games he had composed. I saw
at a glance that they were brilliantly devised and somehow novel and original in style,
asked to borrow the sketches for study, and discovered that these Game compositions
were true literary productions, so amazing and singular that I feel I should speak of them
here. These Games were little dramas, in structure almost pure monologues, reflecting the
imperiled but brilliant life of the author's mind like a perfect self-portrait. The various
themes and groups of themes on which the Games were based, and their sequences and
confrontations, were brilliantly conceived, dialectically orchestrated and counterpoised.
But beyond that, the synthesis and harmonization of the opposing voices was not carried
to the ultimate conclusion in the usual classical manner; rather, this harmonization
underwent a whole series of refractions, of splintering into overtones, and paused each
time, as if wearied and despairing, just on the point of dissolution, finally fading out in
questioning and doubt. As a result, those Games possessed a stirring chromatics, of a
kind never before ventured, as far as I know. Moreover, the Games as a whole expressed
a tragic doubt and renunciation; they became figurative statements of the dubiousness of
all intellectual endeavor. At the same time, in their intellectual structure as well as in their
calligraphic technique and perfection, they were so extraordinarily beautiful that they
brought tears to one's eyes. Each of these Games moved with such gravity and sincerity
toward solution, only at the last so nobly to forgo the attempt at solution, that it was like a
perfect elegy upon the transitoriness inherent in all beautiful things and the ultimate
dubiety immanent in all soaring flights of the intellect.
"Item: I would recommend Tegularius, if he should outlive me or my term in
office, as an extremely fine, precious, but imperiled treasure. He should be granted
maximum freedom; he should be consulted on all important questions concerning the
Game. But students should never be placed in his sole guidance."
In the course of the years this remarkable man had become Knecht's true friend.
He admired Knecht's capacity for leadership as well as his mind, and showed a touching
devotion toward him. In fact, much of what we know about Knecht has been handed
down by Tegularius. In the innermost circle of younger Glass Bead Game players he was
perhaps the only one who did not envy his friend for the important assignment he had
received, and the only one for whom Knecht's absence for an indefinite time meant an
almost unbearable anguish and sense of loss.
Joseph himself rejoiced in the new state of affairs as soon as he recovered from
the shock of suddenly being shorn of his beloved freedom. He felt eagerness to travel,
pleasure in activity, and curiosity about the alien world to which he was being sent.
Incidentally, he was not allowed to depart for Mariafels without preparation; first he was
assigned to the "Police" for three weeks. That was the students' name for the small
department within the Board of Educators which might be called its Political Department
or even its Foreign Ministry, were these not somewhat grandiose names for so small an
affair. There he received instruction in the rules of conduct for brothers of the Order
during their stays in the outside world. Dubois, the head of this office, personally devoted
an hour to him nearly every day. This conscientious man seemed worried that an
altogether untried young man without the faintest knowledge of the world should be sent
to such a foreign post. He made no attempt to conceal his disapproval of the Magister
Ludi's decision, and took extra pains to inform this new member of the Order on the facts
of life in the outside world and the means for effectively combatting its perils. His sincere
paternal solicitude fortunately was matched by Joseph's willingness to be instructed. The
result was that during those hours of introduction into the rules of intercourse with the
world, the teacher conceived a real affection for Joseph Knecht, and finally felt able to
dismiss him reassured and fully confident that the young man would be able to carry out
his mission successfully. Dubois even tried, more out of personal good will than the
demands of politics, to give Joseph a kind of additional assignment on his own behalf. As
one of Castalia's few "politicians," Dubois was one of that tiny group of officials whose
thoughts and studies were largely devoted to sustaining the legal and economic
continuance of Castalia, to regulating its relationship to the outside world and the
problems that arose from its dependence on the world. The great majority of Castalians,
the officials no less than the scholars and students, lived in their Pedagogic Province and
their Order as if these constituted a stable, eternal, inevitable world. They knew, of
course, that it had not always existed, that it had come into being slowly and amid bitter
struggles in times of cruel distress; they knew it had originated at the end of the Age of
Wars out of a double source: the heroically ascetic efforts of scholars, artists, and thinkers
who had come to their senses, and the profound craving of the exhausted, bled, and
betrayed peoples for order, normality, reason, lawfulness, and moderation. Castalians
knew this, and understood the function of all the Orders and Pedagogic Provinces
throughout the world: to abstain from government and competition and instead to assure
stability for the spiritual foundations of moderation and law everywhere. But that the
present order of things was not to be taken for granted, that it presupposed a certain
harmony between the world and the guardians of culture, that this harmony could always
be disrupted, and that world history taken as a whole by no means furthered what was
desirable, rational, and beautiful in the life of man, but at best only occasionally tolerated
it as an exception -- all this they did not realize. Except for those few political thinkers
like Dubois, almost all Castalians were unaware of the secret complex of problems
underlying the existence of Castalia. Once Knecht won the confidence of Dubois, he was
given a glimpse of the political foundations of Castalia. At first the subject struck him as
rather repellent and uninteresting -- which, indeed, was the reaction of most members of
the Order. But then he recalled Plinio Designori's remark about possible dangers to
Castalia. Along with that recollection there flooded back into his mind the whole bitter
aftertaste of his youthful debates with Plinio, seemingly long since settled and forgotten.
Now these suddenly seemed to him of the highest importance and, moreover, a stage on
the road to his "awakening."
At the end of their last talk Dubois said to him: "I think I can let you go now. You
are to adhere strictly to the assignment his honor the Magister Ludi has given you, and no
less strictly to the rules of conduct we have taught you here. It was a pleasure to me to be
able to help you. You will see that the three weeks we have kept you were not time lost.
And if you should ever want to recompense me for my contribution to your education, I
can suggest a way. You will be entering a Benedictine abbey, and if you stay there a
while and commend yourself to the Fathers, you will probably hear political
conversations and sense political currents among the venerable Fathers and their guests.
If you would occasionally inform me about such matters, I would be grateful. Please
understand me aright: you are certainly not to regard yourself as a kind of spy or in any
way misuse confidences. You are not to pass along anything that goes against your
conscience. I guarantee that we will use any information we may receive only in the
interest of our Order and Castalia. We are not real politicians and have no power at all,
but we too are dependent on the world, which either needs or tolerates us. Circumstances
may arise in which we might profit by knowing that a statesman is making a retreat in a
monastery, or that the Pope is said to be ill, or that new candidates have been added to the
list of future cardinals. We are not dependent on your information -- we have quite a
variety of sources -- but one little source more can do no harm. Go now, you need not say
yes or no to this matter. For the present all that is needed is for you to comport yourself
well in your official assignment and do us honor among the spiritual Fathers. Bon
voyage."
In the Book of Changes, which Knecht consulted by means of the yarrow stalk
ritual before he set out, he counted out the hexagram Lii, which signifies "The
Wanderer," and the augury: "Success through smallness. Persistence is good fortune to
the wanderer." He found a six for the second place, which yielded the interpretation:
The wanderer comes to the inn.
He has his possessions with him.
He receives the persistent attentions of a young servant.
Knecht's leave-taking went off cheerfully, except that his last talk with Tegularius
proved to be a hard test of both their characters. Fritz controlled himself by extreme effort
and appeared absolutely frozen in the coolness he forced himself to display. For him, the
best he had was departing with his friend. Knecht's nature did not permit so passionate
and above all so exclusive an attachment to a friend. If need be, he could get along
without one and could direct his affections easily toward new objects and people. This
parting was not a painful loss for him; but he knew his friend well enough to know what a
shock and trial it meant for him, and he was concerned. He had given much thought to
the nature of this friendship, and had once spoken about it with the Music Master. To a
certain extent he had learned to objectify his own experience and feelings, and to regard
them critically. In so doing he had become aware that it was not really, or at any rate not
only, his friend's great talent that attracted him to Tegularius. Rather, it was the
association of this talent with such serious defects, such great fragility. And he realized
that the single-mindedness of the love Tegularius offered him had not only its beautiful
aspect, but also a dangerous attraction, for it tempted him to display his power over one
weaker in strength though not in love. Therefore in this relationship he had made restraint
and self-discipline his duty to the last. Fond though he was of Tegularius, the friendship
would not have acquired so deep a meaning for him if it had not taught him something
about the dominion he had over others weaker and less secure than himself. He learned
that this power to influence others was part and parcel of the educator's gift, and that it
concealed dangers and imposed responsibility. Tegularius, after all, was only one of
many. In the eyes of quite a few others Knecht read silent courtship.
At the same time, during the past year he had become far more conscious of the
highly charged atmosphere in which he lived in the Glass Bead Game village. For there
he was part of an officially nonexistent but very sharply defined circle, or class, the finest
elite among the candidates and tutors of the Glass Bead Game. Now and then one or
another of that group would be called upon to serve in an auxiliary capacity under the
Magister or Archivist, or to help teach one of the Game courses; but they were never
assigned to the lower or middle level of officialdom or the teaching corps. They provided
the reserve for filling vacancies in leading posts. They knew one another thoroughly; they
had almost no illusions about talents, characters, and achievements. And precisely
because among these initiates and aspirants for the highest dignities each one was preeminent, each of the very first rank in performance, knowledge, and academic record --
precisely for that reason those traits and nuances of character which predestined a
candidate for leadership and success inevitably counted for a great deal and were closely
observed. A dash more or less of graciousness, of suasion with younger men or with the
authorities, of amiability, was of great importance in this group and could give its
possessor a definitive edge over his rivals. Fritz Tegularius plainly belonged to this circle
merely as an outsider; he was tolerated as a guest but kept at the periphery because he
had no gift for rule. Just as plainly Knecht belonged to the innermost circle. What
appealed to the young and made them his admirers was his wholesome vigor and still
youthful charm which appeared to be resistant to passions, incorruptible and then again
boyishly irresponsible -- a kind of innocence, that is. And what commended him to his
superiors was the reverse side of this innocence: his freedom from ambition and craving
for success.
Of late, the effects of his personality had begun to dawn upon the young man. He
became aware of his attraction for those below him, and gradually, belatedly, of how he
affected those above him. And when he looked back from his new standpoint of
awareness to his boyhood, he found both lines running through his life and shaping it.
Classmates and younger boys had always courted him; superiors had taken benevolent
note of him. There had been exceptions, such as Headmaster Zbinden; but on the other
hand he had been recipient of such distinctions as the patronage of the Music Master, and
latterly of Dubois and the Magister Ludi. It was all perfectly plain, in spite of which
Knecht had never been willing to see it and accept it in its entirety. Obviously his fate
was to enter the elite everywhere, to find admiring friends and highly placed patrons. It
happened of its own accord, without his trying. Obviously he would not be allowed to
settle down in the shadows at the base of the hierarchy; he must move steadily toward its
apex, approach the bright light at the top. He would not be a subordinate or an
independent scholar; he would be a master. That he grasped this later than others in a
similar position gave him that indescribable extra magic, that note of innocence.
But why was it that he realized it so late, and so reluctantly? Because he had not
sought it at all, and did not want it. He had no need to dominate, took no pleasure in
commanding; he desired the contemplative far more than the active life, and would have
been content to spend many years more, if not his whole life, as an obscure student, an
inquiring and reverent pilgrim through the sanctuaries of the past, the cathedrals of
music, the gardens and forests of mythology, languages and ideas. Now that he saw
himself being pushed inexorably into the vita activa he was more than ever aware of the
tensions of the aspirations, the rivalries, the ambitions among those around him. He felt
his innocence threatened and no longer tenable. Now, he realized, he must desire and
affirm the position that was being thrust upon him; otherwise he would be haunted by a
feeling of imprisonment and nostalgia for the freedom of the past ten years. And since he
was not as yet altogether ready for that affirmation, he felt his temporary departure from
Waldzell and the Province, his journey out into the world, as a great relief and release.
The monastery of Mariafels, through the many centuries of its existence, had
shared in the making and the suffering of the history of the West. It had experienced
periods of flowering and decline, had passed through rebirths and new nadirs, and had
been at various times and in assorted fields famous and brilliant. Once a center of
Scholastic learning and the art of disputation, still possessing an enormous library of
medieval theology, it had risen to new glory after periods of slackness and sluggishness.
It then became famous for its music, its much-praised choir, and the Masses and oratorios
composed and performed by the Fathers. From those days it still retained a fine musical
tradition, half a dozen nut-brown chests full of music manuscripts, and the finest organ in
the country. Then the monastery had entered a political era, which had likewise left
behind a tradition and a certain skill. In times of war and barbarization Mariafels had
several times become a little island of rationality where the better minds among the
opposed parties cautiously sought each other out and groped their way toward
reconciliation. And once -- that was the last high point in its history -- Mariafels had been
the birthplace of a peace treaty which for a while met the longings of the exhausted
nations. Afterward, when a new age began and Castalia was founded, the monastery took
an attitude of wait-and-see, was in fact rather hostile, presumably on instructions from
Rome. A request from the Board of Educators to grant hospitality to a scholar who
wished to work for a time in the monastery's Scholastic library was politely turned down,
as was an invitation to send a representative to a conference of musicologists. Intercourse
between Castalia and the monastery had first begun in the time of Abbot Pius, who in his
latter years became keenly interested in the Glass Bead Game. Ever since then a friendly
though not very lively relationship had developed. Books were exchanged, reciprocal
hospitality granted. Knecht's patron, the Music Master, had spent a few weeks in
Mariafels during his younger years, copying music manuscripts and playing the famous
organ. Knecht knew of this, and rejoiced at the prospect of staying in a place of which his
venerated Master had occasionally spoken with pleasure.
The respect and politeness with which he was received went so far beyond his
expectations that he felt rather embarrassed. This was, after all, the first time that Castalia
had offered the monastery a Glass Bead Game player of high distinction for an indefinite
period. Joseph had learned from Dubois that he was not to regard himself as an
individual, especially during the early period of his stay, but solely as the representative
of Castalia, and that he was to accept and respond both to courtesies and possible
aloofness solely as an ambassador. That attitude helped him through his initial constraint.
He likewise soon overcame the feelings of strangeness, anxiety, and mild
excitability which troubled his first few nights and kept him from sleeping. And since
Abbot Gervasius displayed a good-natured and merry benevolence toward him, he
quickly came to feel at ease in his new environment. The freshness and vigor of the
landscape delighted him. The monastery was situated in rough, mountainous country, full
of abrupt cliffs and pockets of rich pasture where handsome cattle grazed. He savored
with deep pleasure the massiveness and size of the ancient buildings, in which the history
of many centuries could be read. He enjoyed the beauty and simple comfort of his
apartment, two rooms on the top floor of the guest wing. For recreation he went on
exploratory walks through the fine little city-state with its two churches, cloisters,
archives, library, Abbot's apartment, and courtyards, with its extensive barns filled with
thrifty livestock, its gurgling fountains, gigantic vaulted wine and fruit cellars, its two
refectories, the famous chapter house, the well-tended gardens and the workshops of the
lay brothers: cooper, cobbler, tailor, smith, and so on, all forming a small village around
the largest courtyard. He was granted entry to the library; the organist showed him the
great organ and allowed him to play on it; and he was strongly attracted to the chests in
which an impressive number of unpublished and to some extent quite unknown music
manuscripts of earlier ages awaited study.
The monks did not seem to be terribly impatient for him to begin his official
functions. Not only days but weeks passed before anyone seriously brought up the real
purpose of his presence there. From his first day, it was true, some of the Fathers, and the
Abbot himself in particular, had been eager to chat with Joseph about the Glass Bead
Game. But no one said anything about instruction or any other systematic work with the
Game. In other respects, too, Knecht felt that the manners, style of life, and general tone
of intercourse among the monks was couched in a tempo hitherto unknown to him. There
was a kind of venerable slowness, a leisurely and benign patience in which all these
Fathers seemed to share, including those whose temperaments seemed rather more active.
It was the spirit of their Order, the millennial pace of an age-old, privileged community
whose orderly existence had survived hundreds of vicissitudes. They all shared it, as
every bee shares the fate of its hive, sleeps its sleep, suffers its sufferings, trembles with
its trembling. This Benedictine temper seemed at first glance less intellectual, less supple
and acute, less active than the style of life in Castalia, but on the other hand calmer, less
malleable, older, more resistant to tribulation. The spirit and mentality of this place had
long ago achieved a harmony with nature.
With curiosity and intense interest, and with great admiration as well, Knecht
submitted to the mood of life in this monastery, which at a time before Castalia existed
had been almost the same as it was now, and even then fifteen hundred years old, and
which was so congenial to the contemplative side of his nature. He was an honored guest,
honored far beyond his expectations and deserts; but he felt distinctly that these
courtesies were a matter of form and custom and not specially addressed to him as a
person, nor to the spirit of Castalia or of the Glass Bead Game. Rather, the Benedictines
were displaying the majestic politeness of an ancient power to a younger one. He had
been only partly prepared for this implicit superiority, and after a while, for all that his
life in Mariafels was proving so agreeable, he began to feel so insecure that he asked his
authorities for more precise instructions on how to conduct himself. The Magister Ludi in
person wrote him a few lines: "Don't worry about taking all the time you need for your
study of the life there. Profit by your days, learn, try to make yourself well liked and
useful, insofar as you find your hosts receptive, but do not obtrude yourself, and never
seem more impatient, never seem to be under more pressure than they. Even if they
should go on treating you for an entire year as if each day were your first as a guest in
their house, enter calmly into the spirit of it and behave as if two or even ten years more
do not matter to you. Take it as a test in the practice of patience. Meditate carefully. If
time hangs heavy on your hands, set aside a few hours every day, no more than four, for
some regular work, study, or the copying of manuscripts, say. But avoid giving the
impression of diligence; be at the disposal of everyone who wishes to chat with you."
Knecht followed this advice, and soon began feeling more relaxed. Hitherto he
had been thinking too much of his assignment to act as instructor to amateur Glass Bead
Game players -- the ostensible reason for his mission here -- whereas the Fathers of the
monastery were treating him rather as the envoy of a friendly power who must be kept in
good humor. And when at last Abbot Gervasius recollected the assignment, and brought
him together with several of the monks who had already had an introduction to the art of
the Glass Bead Game and hoped he would give them a more advanced course, it turned
out to his astonishment and his intense disappointment that the noble Game was
cultivated in a most superficial and amateurish way at this hospitable place. He would
evidently have to content himself with a very modest level of knowledge of the Game.
Slowly, though, he came to realize that he had not really been sent here for the sake of
lifting the standards of the Glass Bead Game in the monastery. The assignment of
coaching the few Fathers moderately devoted to the Game and equipping them with a
modest degree of skill was easy, much too easy. Any other adept at the Game, even if he
were still far from belonging to the elite, would have been equal to the task. Instruction,
then, could not be the real purpose of his mission. He began to realize that he had
probably been sent here less to teach than to learn.
However, just as he thought he had grasped this, his authority in the monastery,
and consequently his self-assurance, was unexpectedly reinforced. This came in the nick
of time, for in spite of all the charms of being a guest there, he had already at times begun
to feel his stay as something like a punitive transfer. One day, however, in a conversation
with the Abbot he inadvertently made some allusion to the Chinese I Ching. The Abbot
showed marked interest, asked a few questions, and could not disguise his delight when
he found his guest so unexpectedly versed in Chinese and the Book of Changes. The
Abbot, too, was fond of the I Ching. He knew no Chinese, and his knowledge of the book
of oracles and other Chinese mysteries was limited -- in all their scholarly interests the
present inmates of the monastery seemed content with a harmless smattering.
Nevertheless, this intelligent man, who was so much more experienced and worldly-wise
than his guest, obviously had a real feeling for the spirit of ancient Chinese attitudes
toward politics and life. A conversation of unusual liveliness ensued. For the first time
real warmth was injected into the prevailing tone of remote courtesy between host and
guest. The consequence was that Knecht was asked to give the Abbot instruction in the I
Ching twice a week.
While his relationship to his host, the Abbot, thus increased in liveliness and
meaning, while his friendly fellowship with the organist throve and the small
ecclesiastical state in which he lived gradually became familiar territory to him, the
promise of the oracle he had consulted before leaving Castalia also neared fulfillment. As
the wanderer who carried his possessions with him, he had been promised not only the
shelter of an inn but also "the persistent attentions of a young servant." The wanderer felt
justified in taking the consummation of this promise as a good sign, a sign that he in truth
had "his possessions with him." In other words, far away from the schools, teachers,
friends, patrons, and helpers, far from the nourishing and salutary home atmosphere of
Castalia, he carried within himself the spirit and the energies of the Province, and with
their aid he was moving toward an active and useful life.
The foretold "young servant," as it turned out, appeared in the shape of a seminary
pupil named Anton. Although this young man subsequently played no part in Joseph
Knecht's life, in Joseph's peculiarly divided mood during his sojourn in the monastery the
boy seemed a harbinger of new and greater things. Anton was a close-mouthed
youngster, but temperamental and talented looking, and almost ready for admission into
the community of monks. Joseph's path often crossed his, whereas he scarcely knew any
of the other seminary pupils, who were confined in a wing by themselves, where guests
were not admitted. In fact it was obvious that they were being kept from contact with
him. Seminary pupils were not permitted to participate in the Game course.
Anton worked as a helper in the library several times a week. Here it was that
Knecht met him, and occasionally had a few words with him. As time went on, it became
evident to Knecht that this young man with the intense eyes under heavy black brows was
devoted to him with that enthusiasm and readiness to serve so typical of the boyish
adoration he had encountered so often by now. Although every time it happened he felt a
desire to fend it off, he had long ago come to recognize it as a vital element in the life of
the Castalian Order. But in the monastery he decided to be doubly withdrawn; he felt it
would be a violation of hospitality to exert any sway over this boy who was still subject
to the discipline of religious education. Moreover, he was well aware that strict chastity
was the commandment here, and this, it seemed to him, could make a boyish infatuation
even more dangerous. In any case, he must avoid any chance of giving offense, and he
governed himself accordingly.
In the library, the one place where he habitually met Anton, he also made the
acquaintance of a man he had at first almost failed to notice, so modest was his
appearance. In time, however, he was to know him very well indeed, and to love him for
the rest of his life with the kind of grateful reverence he felt, otherwise, only toward the
now retired Music Master. The man was Father Jacobus, perhaps the most eminent
historian of the Benedictine Order. He was at that time about sixty, a spare, elderly man
with a sparrow hawk's head on a long, sinewy neck. Seen from the front, his face had
something dull and lifeless about it, since he was chary of gazing outward; but his profile,
with the boldly curved line of the forehead, the deep furrow above the sharp bridge of his
hooked nose, and the rather short but attractively shaped chin, suggested a definite and
original personality.
This quiet old man -- who, incidentally, on closer acquaintance could be
extremely vivacious -- had a table of his own in a small room off the main hall of the
library. Though the monastery possessed such priceless books, he seemed to be the only
really serious working scholar in the place. It was, by the way, the novice Anton who by
chance called Joseph Knecht's attention to Father Jacobus. Knecht had noticed that the
room in which the scholar had his table was regarded almost as a private domain. The
few users of the library entered it only if they had to, and then moved softly and
respectfully on tiptoe, although the Father bent over his books did not appear to be easily
disturbed. Knecht, of course, quickly imitated this circumspection, and thereby remained
at a remove from the industrious old man.
One day, however, when Anton had brought Father Jacobus some books, Knecht
noticed how the young man lingered a moment at the open door of the study, looking
back at the scholar already absorbed in his work again. There was adoration in Anton's
face, an expression of admiration and reverence mingled with those emotions of
affectionate consideration and helpfulness that well-bred youth sometimes manifests
toward the paltriness and fragility of age. Knecht's first reaction was delight; the sight
was pleasing in itself, as well as evidence that Anton could so look up to older men
without any trace of physical feeling. A rather sarcastic thought followed immediately, a
thought Joseph felt almost ashamed of: how poor the state of scholarship must be in this
institution that the only seriously active scholar in the place was stared at as if he were a
fabulous beast. Nevertheless, Anton's look of reverent admiration for the old man opened
Knecht's eyes. He became aware of the learned Father's existence. He himself took to
throwing a glance now and then at the man, discovered his Roman profile, and gradually
found out one thing and another about Father Jacobus which seemed to suggest a most
extraordinary mind and character. Knecht had already learned that he was a historian and
regarded as the foremost authority on the history of the Benedictine Order.
One day the Father spoke to him. His manner of speech had none of the broad,
deliberately benevolent, deliberately good-natured, somewhat avuncular tone which
seemed to be the style of the monastery. Speaking in a low and almost timorous voice,
but placing his stresses with a wonderful precision, he invited Joseph to visit him in his
room after vespers. "You will find in me," he said, "neither a specialist on the history of
Castalia nor a Glass Bead Game player. But since, as it now seems, our two so different
Orders are forming ever-closer ties of friendship, I should not wish to exclude myself,
and would be happy to take personal advantage now and then of your presence among
us."
He spoke with utter seriousness, but his low voice and shrewd old face conferred
upon his all-too-polite phrases that wonderful note of equivocation, ranging through the
whole compass from earnestness to irony, from deference to faint mockery, from
passionate engagement to playfulness, such as may be sensed when two holy men or two
princes of the Church greet each other with endless bows in a game of mutual courtesies
and trial of patience. This blending of superiority and mockery, of wisdom and obstinate
ceremonial, was deeply familiar to Joseph Knecht from his studies of Chinese language
and life. He found it marvelously refreshing, and realized that it was some time since he
had last heard this tone -- which, among others, the Glass Bead Game Master Thomas
commanded with consummate skill. With gratitude and pleasure, Joseph accepted the
invitation.
That evening he called at the Father's rather isolated apartment at the end of a
quiet side-wing of the monastery. As he stood in the corridor, wondering which door to
knock at, he heard piano music, to his considerable surprise. It was a sonata by Purcell,
played unpretentiously and without virtuosity, but cleanly and in impeccable tempo. The
pure music sounded through the door; its heartfelt gaiety and sweet triads reminded him
of the days in Waldzell when he had practiced pieces of this sort on various instruments
with his friend Ferromonte. He waited, listening with deep enjoyment, for the end of the
sonata. In the still, twilit corridor it sounded so lonely and unworldly, and so brave and
innocent also, both childlike and superior, as all good music must in the midst of the
unredeemed muteness of the world.
He knocked at the door. Father Jacobus called, "Come in," and received him with
his unassuming dignity. Two candles were still burning by the small piano. "Yes," Father
Jacobus said in answer to Knecht's question, "I play for a half-hour or even an hour every
night. I usually call a halt to my day's work when darkness falls and would rather not read
or write during the hours before sleep."
They talked about music, about Purcell, Handel, the ancient musical tradition
among the Benedictines -- of all the Catholic Orders the one most devoted to the arts.
Knecht expressed a desire to know something of the history of the Order. The
conversation grew lively and touched on a hundred questions. The old monk's historical
knowledge seemed to be truly astounding, but he frankly admitted that the history of
Castalia, of the Castalian idea and Order, had not interested him. He had scarcely studied
it, he said, and did not conceal his critical attitude toward this Castalia whose "Order" he
regarded as an imitation of the Christian models, and fundamentally a blasphemous
imitation since the Castalian Order had no religion, no God, and no Church as its basis.
Knecht listened respectfully, but pointed out that other than Benedictine and Roman
Catholic views of religion, God and the Church were possible, and moreover had existed,
and that it would not do to deny the purity of their intentions nor their profound influence
on the life of the mind.
"Quite so," Jacobus said. "No doubt you are thinking of the Protestants, among
others. They were unable to preserve religion and the Church, but at times they displayed
a great deal of courage and produced some exemplary men. I spent some years studying
the various attempts at reconciliation among the hostile Christian denominations and
churches, especially those of the period around 1700, when we find such people as the
philosopher and mathematician Leibniz and that eccentric Count Zinsendorf endeavoring
to reunite the inimical brothers. Altogether, the eighteenth century, hasty and shallow
though it often seems in its judgments, has such a rich and many-faceted intellectual
history. The Protestants of that period strike me as particularly interesting. There was one
man I discovered, a philologist, teacher, and educator of great stature -- a Swabian Pietist,
by the way -- whose moral influence can be clearly traced for two hundred years after his
death. But that is another subject. Let us return to the question of the legitimacy and
historical mission of real Orders. . ."
"Oh no," Joseph Knecht broke in. "Please say more about this teacher you have
just mentioned. I almost think I can guess who he is."
"Guess."
"I thought at first of Francke of Halle, but since you say he was a Swabian I can
think of none other than Johann Albrecht Bengel."
Jacobus laughed. An expression of pleasure transfigured his face. "You surprise
me, my friend," he exclaimed. "It was indeed Bengel I had in mind. How do you happen
to know of him? Or is it normal in your astonishing Province that people know such
abstruse and forgotten things and names? I would vouch that if you were to ask all the
Fathers, teachers, and pupils in our monastery, and those of the last few generations as
well, not one would know this name."
"In Castalia, too, few would know it, perhaps no one besides myself and two of
my friends. I once engaged in studies of eighteenth-century Pietism for private reasons,
and as it happened I was much impressed by several Swabian theologians -- chief among
them Bengel. At the time he seemed to me the ideal teacher and guide for youth. I was so
taken with the man that I even had a photo made of his portrait in an old book, and kept it
above my desk."
Father Jacobus continued to chuckle. "Our meeting is certainly taking place under
unusual auspices," he said. "It is remarkable enough that you and I should both have
come upon this forgotten man in the course of our studies. Perhaps it is even more
remarkable that this Swabian Protestant should have been able to influence both a
Benedictine monk and a Castalian Glass Bead Game player. Incidentally, I imagine that
your Glass Bead Game is an art requiring a great deal of imagination, and wonder that so
stringently sober a man as Bengel should have attracted you."
Knecht, too, chuckled with amusement. "Well," he said, "if you recall that Bengel
devoted years of study to the Revelation of St. John, and what sort of system he devised
for interpreting its prophecies, you will have to admit that our friend could be the very
opposite of sober."
"That is true," Father Jacobus admitted gaily. "And how do you explain such
contradictions?"
"If you will permit me a joke, I would say that what Bengel lacked, and
unconsciously longed for, was the Glass Bead Game. You see, I consider him among the
secret forerunners and ancestors of our Game."
Cautiously, once again entirely in earnest, Jacobus countered: "It strikes me as
rather bold to annex Bengel, of all people, for your pedigree. How do you justify it?"
"It was only a joke, but a ioke that can be defended. While he was still quite
young, before he became engrossed in his great work on the Bible, Bengel once told
friends of a cherished plan of his. He hoped, he said, to arrange and sum up all the
knowledge of his time, symmetrically and synoptically, around a central idea. That is
precisely what the Glass Bead Game does."
"After all, the whole eighteenth century toyed with the encyclopedic idea," Father
Jacobus protested.
"So it did," Joseph agreed. "But what Bengel meant was not just a juxtaposition of
the fields of knowledge and research, but an interrelationship, an organic denominator.
And that is one of the basic ideas of the Glass Bead Game. In fact, I would go further in
my claims: if Bengel had possessed a system similar to that offered by our Game, he
probably would have been spared all the misguided effort involved in his calculation of
the prophetic numbers and his annunciation of the Antichrist and the Millennial
Kingdom. Bengel did not quite find what he longed for: the way to channel all his various
talents toward a single goal. Instead, his mathematical gifts in association with his
philological bent produced that weird blend of pedantry and wild imagination, the 'order
of the ages,' which occupied him for so many years."
"It is fortunate you are not a historian," Jacobus commented. "You tend to let your
own imagination run away with you. But I understand what you mean. I am myself a
pedant only in my own discipline."
It was a fruitful conversation, out of which sprang mutual understanding and a
kind of friendship. It seemed to the Benedictine scholar more than coincidence, or at least
a very special kind of coincidence, that the two of them -- each operating within his own,
Benedictine or Castalian, limitations -- should have discovered this poor instructor at a
Württemberg monastery, this man at once fine-strung and rock-hard, at once visionary
and practical. Father Jacobus concluded that there must be something linking the two of
them for the same unspectacular magnet to affect them both so powerfully. And from that
evening on, which had begun with the Purcell sonata, that link actually existed. Jacobus
enjoyed the exchange of views with so well trained yet still so supple a young mind; this
was a pleasure he did not often have. And Knecht found his association with the
historian, and the education Jacobus provided, a new stage on the path of awakening --
that path which he nowadays identified as his life. To put the matter succinctly: from
Father Jacobus he learned history. He learned the laws and contradictions of historical
studies and historiography. And beyond that, in the following years he learned to see the
present and his own life as historical realities.
Their talks often grew into regular disputations, with formal attacks and rebuttals.
In the beginning it was Father Jacobus who proved to be the more aggressive of the pair.
The more deeply he came to know his young friend's mind, the more he regretted that so
promising a young man should have grown up without the discipline of a religious
education, rather in the pseudo-discipline of an intellectual and aesthetic system of
thought. Whenever he found something objectionable in Knecht's way of thinking, he
blamed it on that "modern" Castalian spirit with its abstruseness and its fondness for
frivolous abstractions. And whenever Knecht surprised him by wholesome views and
remarks akin to his own thought, he exulted because his young friend's sound nature had
so well withstood the damage of Castalian education. Joseph took this criticism of
Castalia very calmly, repelling the attacks only when the old scholar seemed to him to
have gone too far in his passion. But among the good Father's belittling remarks about
Castalia were some whose partial truth Joseph had to admit, and on one point he changed
his mind completely during his stay in Mariafels. This had to do with the relationship of
Castalian thought to world history, any sense of which, Father Jacobus said, was totally
lacking in Castalia. "You mathematicians and Glass Bead Game players," he would say,
"have distilled a kind of world history to suit your own tastes. It consists of nothing but
the history of ideas and of art. Your history is bloodless and lacking in reality. You know
all about the decay of Latin syntax in the second or third centuries and don't know a thing
about Alexander or Caesar or Jesus Christ. You treat world history as a mathematician
does mathematics, in which nothing but laws and formulas exist, no reality, no good and
evil, no time, no yesterday, no tomorrow, nothing but an eternal, shallow mathematical
present."
"But how is anyone to study history without attempting to bring order into it?"
Knecht asked.
"Of course one should bring order into history," Jacobus thundered. "Every
science is, among other things, a method of ordering, simplifying, making the indigestible
digestible for the mind. We think we have recognized a few laws in history and try to
apply them to our investigations of historical truth. Suppose an anatomist is dissecting a
body. He does not confront wholly surprising discoveries. Rather, he finds beneath the
epidermis a congeries of organs, muscles, tendons, and bones which generally conform to
a pattern he has brought to his work. But if the anatomist sees nothing but his pattern, and
ignores the unique, individual reality of his object, then he is a Castalian, a Glass Bead
Game player; he is using mathematics on the least appropriate object. I have no quarrel
with the student of history who brings to his work a touchingly childish, innocent faith in
the power of our minds and our methods to order reality; but first and foremost he must
respect the incomprehensible truth, reality, and uniqueness of events. Studying history,
my friend, is no joke and no irresponsible game. To study history one must know in
advance that one is attempting something fundamentally impossible, yet necessary and
highly important. To study history means submitting to chaos and nevertheless retaining
faith in order and meaning. It is a very serious task, young man, and possibly a tragic
one."
Among the remarks of Father Jacobus which Knecht at the time quoted in letters
to his friends, here is one more characteristic outburst:
"Great men are to youth like the raisins in the cake of world history. They are also
part of its actual substance, of course, and it is not so simple and easy as might be thought
to distinguish the really great men from the pseudo-greats. Among the latter, it is the
historical moment itself, and their ability to foresee its coming and seize it, that gives
them the semblance of greatness. Quite a few historians and biographers, to say nothing
of journalists, consider this ability to divine and seize upon a historical moment -- in
other words, temporary success -- as in itself a mark of greatness. The corporal who
becomes a dictator overnight, or the courtesan who for a while controls the good or ill
humor of a ruler of the world, are favorite figures of such historians. And idealistically
minded youths, on the other hand, most love the tragic failures, the martyrs, those who
came on the scene a moment too soon or too late. For me, since I am after all chiefly a
historian of our Benedictine Order, the most attractive and amazing aspects of history,
and the most deserving of study, are not individuals and not coups, triumphs, or
downfalls; rather I love and am insatiably curious about such phenomena as our
congregation. For it is one of those long-lived organizations whose purpose is to gather,
educate, and reshape men's minds and souls, to make a nobility of them, not by eugenics,
not by blood, but by the spirit -- a nobility as capable of serving as of ruling. In Greek
history I was fascinated not by the galaxy of heroes and not by the obtrusive shouting in
the Agora, but by efforts such as those of the Pythagorean brotherhood or the Platonic
Academy. In Chinese history no other feature is so striking as the longevity of the
Confucian system. And in our own Occidental history the Christian Church and the
Orders which serve it as part of its structure, seem to me historical elements of the
foremost importance. The fact that an adventurer contrives to conquer or found a
kingdom which lasts twenty, fifty, or even a hundred years, or that a well-meaning
idealist on a royal or imperial throne once in a while brings greater honesty into politics,
or attempts to carry some visionary cultural project to fruition; that under high pressure a
nation or other community has been capable of incredible feats of achievement and
suffering -- all that interests me far less than the ever-recurrent efforts to establish such
organizations as our Order, and that some of these efforts have endured for a thousand or
two thousand years. I shall say nothing of holy Church itself; for us believers it is beyond
discussion. But that communities such as the Benedictines, the Dominicans, later the
Jesuits and others, have survived for centuries and, despite their ups and downs, the
assaults upon them, and the adaptations they have made, retain their face and their voice,
their gesture, their individual soul -- this is, for me, the most remarkable and meritorious
phenomenon in history."
Knecht even admired Father Jacobus's spells of angry unfairness. At the time,
however, he had no notion of who Father Jacobus really was. He regarded him solely as a
profound and brilliant scholar and was unaware that here was someone who was
consciously participating in world history, and helping to shape it as the leading
statesman of his Order. As an expert in contemporary politics as well as political history,
Father Jacobus was constantly being approached from many sides for information,
advice, and mediation. For some two years, up to the time of his first vacation, Knecht
continued to think of Father Jacobus solely as a scholar, knowing no more of the man's
life, activity, reputation, and influence than the monk cared to reveal. The learned Father
knew how to keep his counsel, even in friendship; and his brothers in the monastery were
also far abler at concealment than Joseph would have imagined.
After some two years Knecht had adapted to the life in the monastery as perfectly
as any guest and outsider could. From time to time he had helped the organist modestly
continue the thin thread of an ancient and great tradition in the monastery's small chorus
of motet singers. He had made several finds in the monastic musical archives and had
sent to Waldzell, and especially to Monteport, several copies of old works. He had
trained a small beginners' class of Glass Bead Game players, among whom the most
zealous pupil was young Anton. He had taught Abbot Gervasius no Chinese, but had at
least imparted the technique of manipulating the yarrow sticks and an improved method
of meditating on the aphorisms in the Book of Oracles. The Abbot had grown
accustomed to him, and had long since stopped trying to coax his guest into taking an
occasional glass of wine. The semiannual reports sent by the Abbot to the Glass Bead
Game Master, in reply to official inquiries as to the usefulness of Joseph Knecht, were
full of praise. In Castalia, the lesson plans and marks in Knecht's Game course were
scrutinized even more closely than these reports; the middling level of instruction was
recognized, but the Castalian authorities were satisfied with the way the teacher had
adapted to this level and, in general, to the customs and the spirit of the monastery. They
were even more pleased, and truly surprised -- although they kept this to themselves -- by
his frequent and friendly association with the famous Father Jacobus.
This association had borne all sorts of fruits, and perhaps we may be permitted to
say a word about these even at the cost of anticipating our story somewhat; or at any rate
about the fruit which Knecht most prized. It ripened slowly, slowly, grew as tentatively
and warily as the seeds of high mountain trees that have been planted down in the lush
lowlands: these seeds, consigned to rich soil and a kindly climate, carry in themselves as
their legacy the restraint and mistrust with which their forebears grew; the slow tempo of
growth belongs among their hereditary traits. Thus the prudent old man, accustomed to
keep close watch over all possible influences upon him, permitted the element of
Castalian spirit brought to him by his young friend and antipodal colleague to strike root
only reluctantly and inch by inch. Gradually, however, it sprouted; and of all the good
things that Knecht experienced in his years at the monastery, this was the best and most
precious of all to him: this scanty, hesitant growth of trust and openness from seemingly
hopeless beginnings on the part of the experienced older man, this slowly germinating
and even more slowly admitted sympathy for his younger admirer as a person and,
beyond that, for the specifically Castalian elements in his personality. Step by step the
younger man, seemingly little more than pupil, listener, and learner, led Father Jacobus --
who initially had used the words "Castalian" and Glass Bead Game player only with
ironic emphasis, and often as outright invective -- toward a tolerant and ultimately
respectful acceptance of this other mentality, this other Order, this other attempt to create
an aristocracy of the spirit. Father Jacobus ceased to carp at the youth of the Order,
though with its little more than two centuries the Benedictines were the elder by some
fifteen hundred years. He ceased to regard the Glass Bead Game as mere aesthetic
dandyism; and he ceased to rule out the prospect of friendship and alliance between two
Orders so ill matched in age.
Joseph regarded this partial conquest of Father Jacobus as a personal cause for
rejoicing. He remained unaware that the authorities considered it the utmost of his
accomplishments on his mission to Mariafels. Now and again he wondered in vain what
was the real reason for his assignment to the monastery. Though initially it had seemed to
be a promotion and distinction envied by his competitors, could it not signify a form of
inglorious premature retirement, a relegation to a dead end? But then one could learn
something everywhere, so why not here too? On the other hand, from the Castalian point
of view this monastery, Father Jacobus alone excepted, was certainly no garden of
learning or model of scholarship. He wondered, too, whether his isolation among nothing
but unexacting dilettantes was not already affecting his prowess in the Glass Bead Game.
He could not quite tell whether he was losing ground. For all his uncertainty, however, he
was helped by his lack of ambition as well as his already quite advanced amor fati. On
the whole his life as a guest and unimportant teacher in this cosy old monastic world was
more to his liking than his last months at Waldzell as one of a circle of ambitious men. If
fate wished to leave him forever in this small colonial post, he would certainly try to
change some aspects of his life here -- for example, contrive to bring one of his friends
here or at least ask for a longish leave in Castalia every year -- but for the rest he would
be content.
The reader of this biographical sketch may possibly be waiting for an account of
another side of Knecht's experience in the monastery, namely the religious side. But we
can venture only some tentative hints. It is certainly likely that Knecht had some deeply
felt encounter with religion, with Christianity as daily-practiced in the monastery. In fact
from some of his later remarks and attitudes it is quite clear that he did. But whether and
to what extent he became a Christian is a question we must leave unanswered; these
realms are closed to our researches. In addition to the respect for religions generally
cultivated in Castalia, Knecht had a kind of inner reverence which we would scarcely be
wrong to call pious. Moreover, he had already been well instructed in the schools on the
classical forms of Christian doctrine, especially in connection with his studies of church
music. Above all he was well acquainted with the sacramental meaning and ritual of the
Mass.
With a good deal of astonishment as well as reverence, he had found among the
Benedictines a living religion which he had hitherto known only theoretically and
historically. He attended many services, and after he had familiarized himself with some
of the writings of Father Jacobus, and taken to heart some of their talks, he became fully
aware of how phenomenal this Christianity was -- a religion that through the centuries
had so many times become unmodern and outmoded, antiquated and rigid, but had
repeatedly recalled the sources of its being and thereby renewed itself, once again leaving
behind those aspects which in their time had been modern and victorious. He did not
seriously resist the idea, presented to him every so often in those talks, that perhaps
Castalian culture was merely a secularized and transitory offshoot of Christian culture in
its Occidental form, which would some day be reabsorbed by its parent. Even if that were
so, he once remarked to Father Jacobus, his, Joseph Knecht's, own place lay within the
Castalian and not the Benedictine system; he had to serve the former, not the latter, and
prove himself within it. His task was to work for the system of which he was a member,
without asking whether it could claim perpetual existence, or even a long span of life. He
could only regard conversion as a rather undignified form of escape, he said. In similar
fashion Johann Albrecht Bengel, whom they both venerated, had in his time served a
small and transitory sect without neglecting his duties to the Eternal. Piety, which is to
say faithful service and loyalty up to the point of sacrificing one's life, was part and
parcel of every creed and every stage of individual development; such service and loyalty
were the only valid measure of devoutness.
Knecht had been staying with the Benedictine Fathers for some two years when a
visitor appeared at the monastery who was kept apart from him with great care. Even a
casual introduction was avoided. His curiosity roused by these procedures, he observed
the stranger for the few days of his visit and indulged in all sorts of speculations. He
became convinced that the stranger's religious habit was a disguise. The unknown held
long conferences behind closed doors with the Abbot and Father Jacobus, and was always
receiving and sending urgent messages. Knecht, who by now had at least heard rumors
about the political connections and traditions of the monastery, guessed that the guest
must be a high-ranking statesman on a secret mission, or a sovereign traveling incognito.
As he reflected on the matter, he recalled several guests of the past few months whose
visits, in hindsight, seemed to him equally mysterious or significant. Now he remembered
the chief of the Castalian "police," his friendly mentor Dubois, and the request that he
keep an eye on such events in the monastery. And although he still felt neither the urge
nor the vocation for making such reports, his conscience troubled him for having not
written to the kindly man for so long a time. No doubt Dubois was disappointed in him.
So he wrote him a long letter, tried to explain his silence, and in order to give some
substance to his letter said a few words about his association with Father Jacobus. He had
no idea how carefully and by how many important persons his letter would be read back
in Castalia.
FIVE
THE MISSION
KNECHT'S FIRST STAY at the monastery lasted two years. At this time he was in his
thirty-seventh year. One morning, some two months after his long letter to Dubois, he
was called into the Abbot's office. He expected the affable Abbot would want to chat a bit
about Chinese, and made his appearance promptly. Gervasius came forward to meet him,
a letter in hand.
"I have been honored with a commission for you, my esteemed friend," he said
gaily in his amiably patronizing manner, and promptly dropped into the ironically teasing
tone that had developed as an expression of the still unclarified amity between the
religious and the Castalian Orders -- the tone that was actually a creation of Father
Jacobus. "Incidentally, my respects to your Magister Ludi. What letters he writes! The
honorable gentleman has written to me in Latin, Heaven knows why. When you
Castalians do something, one never knows whether you intend a courtesy or mockery, an
honor or a rap on the knuckles. At any rate, the venerable dominus has written to me in
the kind of Latin that no one in our whole Order could manage at this time, except
possibly Father Jacobus. It's a Latin that might have come directly out of the school of
Cicero, but laced with a carefully measured dash of Church Latin -- and of course it's
again impossible to tell whether that is intended naively as bait for us padres, or meant
ironically, or simply springs from an irresistible impulse to playact, stylize, and
embellish. At any rate, his honor writes that your esteemed authorities wish to see and
embrace you once again, and also to determine to what extent your long stay among
semi-barbarians like us has had a morally and stylistically corrupting effect upon you. In
brief, if I have correctly interpreted the lengthy epistle, a leave has been granted you, and
I have been requested to send my guest home to Waldzell for an indefinite term, but not
forever; on the contrary, the authorities contemplate your returning by and by, if that
seems agreeable to us. I must beg your pardon; I am scarcely capable of appreciating all
the subtleties of the letter. Nor do I imagine that Magister Thomas expected me to. I have
been asked to transmit to you this notice; and now go and consider whether and when you
wish to depart. We shall miss you, my friend, and if you should stay away too long we
shall not fail to demand your return."
In the envelope the Abbot had given him Knecht found a terse notice from the
Board informing him that a leave had been granted him both as a vacation and for
consultation with his superiors, and that he was expected in Waldzell in the near future.
He need not see the current Game course for beginners through to the end unless the
Abbot specifically asked him to. The former Music Master sent his regards. As he read
that line, Joseph started and grew pensive. How had the writer of the letter, the Magister
Ludi, been asked to pass on this greeting, which in any case did not really fit the official
tone of the letter? There must have been a conference of the entire Board, to which the
former Music Master had been invited. Very well, the meetings and decisions of the
Board of Educators did not concern him, but the tone of these greetings struck him as
strange. The message sounded curiously as if it were directed to an equal. It did not
matter what question had been discussed at the conference; the regards proved that the
highest authorities had also talked about Joseph Knecht on that occasion. Was something
new in the offing? Was he to be recalled? And would this be a promotion or a setback?
But the letter spoke only of a leave. To be sure he was eager for this leave; he would have
gladly left the next day. But at least he must say good-by to his pupils and leave
instruction for them. Anton would be very saddened by his departure. And he also owed a
farewell visit to some of the Fathers.
At this point he thought of Jacobus, and to his mild astonishment he felt a slight
ache, an emotion which told him that his heart was more attached to Mariafels than he
had realized. Here he lacked many of the things which he was used to, and which were
dear to him; and in the course of the two years, distance and deprivation had made
Castalia even more beautiful in his imagination. But at this moment he saw clearly that
what Father Jacobus meant to him was irreplaceable, and that he would miss it in
Castalia. At the same time he realized more clearly than ever how much he had learned in
the monastery. Because of his experiences here, he looked forward with rejoicing and
confidence to the journey to Waldzell, to reunions, to the Glass Bead Game, and his
holiday. But his happiness would have been far less were it not for the prospect of
returning.
Coming to an abrupt resolution, he called on Father Jacobus. He told him of his
recall, and of his surprise to find underneath his pleasure at going home and seeing
friends a joyful anticipation of returning. This joy, he said respectfully, was chiefly
connected with Father Jacobus himself. Therefore he had summoned up his courage and
was venturing to ask a great favor: when he returned, would Father Jacobus be his
mentor, if only for an hour or two a week?
Father Jacobus gave a deprecating laugh, and once more came forth with
elegantly sardonic compliments: a simple monk could only gape in mute admiration and
shake his head in wonder at the surpassing range of Castalian culture. But Joseph could
gather that the refusal was not meant seriously, and as they shook hands in parting Father
Jacobus said amiably that he could rest easy about his request, he would gladly do what
he could for him, and he bade Joseph good-by with heartfelt warmth.
Gladly, he set out for his vacation at home, already sure in his heart that his period
in the monastery had not been profitless. At departure he felt like a boy, but he soon
realized that he was no boy and no longer a youth either. He realized that by the feelings
of embarrassment and inner resistance that flooded him as soon as he tried, by a gesture,
a shout, some childish act, to give vent to the mood of release and of schoolboy happiness
at vacation time. No doubt about it, the things that once had been natural and a relief, a
jubilant cry to the birds in a tree, a marching song chanted aloud, swinging along the road
in a light, rhythmical dance-step -- these would not do any more. They would have come
out stiff and forced, would have been foolish and childish. He felt that he was a man,
young in feelings and youthful in strength, but no longer used to surrendering to the
mood of the moment, no longer free, instead kept on his mettle, tied down and dutybound -- by what? By an official post? By the task of representing his country and his
Order to the monks? No, rather it was the Order itself, the hierarchy. As he engaged in
this sudden self-analysis, he realized that he had incomprehensibly grown into the
hierarchy, become part of its structure. His constraint came from the responsibility, from
belonging to the higher collectivity. This it was that made many young men old and many
old men appear young, that held you, supported you, and at the same time deprived you
of your freedom like the stake to which a sapling is tied. This it was that took away your
innocence even while it demanded ever more limpid purity.
In Monteport he paid his respects to the former Music Master, who in his younger
years had himself once been a guest at Mariafels and studied Benedictine music there. He
plied Joseph with many questions about the place. Joseph found the old man somewhat
more subdued and withdrawn, but stronger and gayer in appearance than he had been at
their last meeting. The fatigue had departed from his face; it was not that he had grown
younger since resigning his office, but he definitely looked handsomer and more
spiritualized. Knecht was struck by the fact that though he inquired about the organ, the
chests of music manuscripts, and the choral singing in Mariafels, and even wanted to hear
whether the tree in the cloister garden was still standing, he seemed to have no curiosity
about Knecht's work there, the Glass Bead Game course, or the purpose of his present
leave. Before he continued his journey, however, the old man gave him a valuable hint. "I
have heard," he said with seeming jocularity, "that you have become something of a
diplomat. Not really a very nice occupation, but it seems our people are satisfied with
you. Interpret that as you like. But if it doesn't happen to be your ambition to stay in this
occupation forever, then be on your guard, Joseph. I think they want to capture you for it.
Defend yourself; you have the right to. . . No, ask me no questions; I shall not say a word
more. You will see."
In spite of this warning, which he carried with him like a thorn in his flesh, Joseph
felt something like rapture on returning to Waldzell. It was as if Waldzell were not only
home and the most beautiful place in the world, but as if it had become even lovelier and
more interesting in the meanwhile; or else he was returning with fresh and keener eyes.
And this applied not only to the gates, towers, trees, and river, to the courtyards and halls
and familiar faces. During this furlough he felt a heightened receptivity to the spirit of
Waldzell, to the Order and the Glass Bead Game. It was the grateful understanding of the
homecoming traveler now grown matured and wiser. "I feel," he said to his friend
Tegularius at the end of an enthusiastic eulogy on Waldzell and Castalia, "I feel as if I
spent all my years here asleep, happy enough, to be sure, but unconscious. Now I feel
awake and see everything sharply and clearly, indubitable reality. To think that two years
abroad can so sharpen one's vision."
He enjoyed his vacation as if it were a prolonged festival. His greatest pleasure
came from the games and discussions with his fellow members of the elite at the Vicus
Lusorum, from seeing friends again, and from the genius loci of Waldzell. This soaring
sense of happiness did not reach its peak, however, until after his first audience with the
Glass Bead Game Master; up to then his joy had been mingled with trepidation.
The Magister Ludi asked fewer questions than Knecht had anticipated. He
scarcely mentioned the Game course for beginners and Joseph's studies in the music
archives. On the other hand, he could not hear enough about Father Jacobus, referred
back to him again and again, and was interested in every morsel Joseph could tell him
about this man. From the Magister's great friendliness Joseph concluded that they were
satisfied with him and his mission among the Benedictines, very satisfied indeed. His
conclusion was confirmed by the conduct of Monsieur Dubois, to whom he was promptly
sent by Magister Thomas. "You've done a splendid job," Dubois said. With a low laugh,
he added: "My instinct was certainly at fault when I advised against your being sent to
the monastery. Your winning over the great Father Jacobus in addition to the Abbot, and
making him more favorable toward Castalia, is a great deal more than anyone dared to
hope for."
Two days later Magister Thomas invited Joseph, together with Dubois and the
current head of the Waldzell elite school, Zbinden's successor, to dinner. During the
conversation hour after dinner the new Music Master unexpectedly turned up, as did the
Archivist of the Order -- two more members of the Supreme Board. One of them took
Joseph along to the guest house for a lengthy talk. This invitation for the first time moved
Knecht publicly into the most intimate circle of candidates for high office, and set up
between himself and the average member of the Game elite a barrier which Knecht, now
keenly alert to such matters, at once felt acutely.
For the present he was given a vacation of four weeks and the customary official's
pass to the guest houses of the Province. Although no duties were assigned to him, and he
was not even asked to report, it was evident that he was under observation by his
superiors. For when he went on a few visits and outings, once to Keuperheim, once to
Hirsland, and once to the College of Far Eastern Studies, invitations from the high
officials in these places were immediately forthcoming. Within those few weeks he
actually became acquainted with the entire Board of the Order and with the majority of
the Masters and directors of studies. Had it not been for these highly official invitations
and encounters, these outings would have betokened a return to the freedom of his years
of study. He began to cut back on the visits, chiefly out of consideration for Tegularius,
who was painfully sensitive to these infringements on their time together, but also for the
sake of the Glass Bead Game. For he was very eager to participate in the newest
exercises and to test himself on the latest problems. For this, Tegularius proved to be of
invaluable assistance to him.
His other close friend, Ferromonte, had joined the staff of the new Music Master,
and Joseph was able to see him only twice during this period. He found him hardworking and happy in his work, engrossed in a major musicological task involving the
persistence of Greek music in the dances and folksongs of the Balkan countries.
Enthusiastically, Ferromonte told his friend about his latest discoveries. He had been
exploring the era at the end of the eighteenth century, when baroque music was beginning
to decline and was taking in new materials from Slavic folk music.
However, Knecht spent the greater part of these holidays in Waldzell occupied
with the Glass Bead Game. With Fritz Tegularius he went over the notes Fritz had taken
on a private seminar the Magister had given for advanced players during the past two
semesters. After his two years of deprivation Knecht again plunged with all his energy
into the noble world of the Game, whose magic seemed to him as inseparable from his
life and as indispensable to it as music.
The last days of his vacation arrived before the Magister Ludi came around to
mentioning Joseph's mission in Mariafels, and his next task for the immediate future. He
chatted casually at first, but soon changed to a more earnest and insistent tone as he told
Joseph about a plan conceived by the Board which the majority of the Masters, as well as
Monsieur Dubois, considered highly important: the plan to establish a permanent
Castalian representative at the Holy See. The historic moment had come, Master Thomas
explained in his engaging, urbane manner, or at any rate was drawing near, for bridging
the ancient gulf between Rome and the Order. In future dangers, they would undoubtedly
have common enemies, would share a common fate, and hence were natural allies. In the
long run the present state of affairs was untenable and, properly speaking, undignified. It
would not do for the two powers, whose historic task in the world was to preserve and
foster the things of the spirit and the cause of peace, to go on existing side by side almost
as strangers to each other. The Roman Church had survived the shocks of the last great
epoch of wars, had lived through the crises despite severe losses, and had emerged
renewed and purified, whereas the secular centers of the arts and sciences had gone under
in the general decline of culture. It was out of their ruins that the Order and the Castalian
ideal had arisen. For that very reason, and because of its venerable age, it was right and
proper to grant the Church precedence. She was the older, more distinguished power, her
worth tested in more and greater storms. For the present, the problem was to awaken the
Roman Catholics to greater awareness of the kinship between the two powers, and their
dependence upon each other in all future crises.
(At this point Knecht thought: "Oh, so they want to send me to Rome, possibly
forever." Mindful of the former Music Master's warning, he inwardly put himself in a
posture of defense.)
An important step forward, Master Thomas continued, had already been taken as
a result of Knecht's mission in Mariafels. In itself this mission had been only a polite
gesture, imposing no obligations and undertaken without ulterior motives at the invitation
of the others. Otherwise, of course, the Board would not have sent a politically innocent
Glass Bead Game player, but some younger official from Dubois's department. But as it
turned out this experiment, this innocuous mission, had had astonishing results. A leading
mind of contemporary Catholicism, Father Jacobus, had been made acquainted with the
spirit of Castalia and had come to take a favorable view of that spirit, which he had
hitherto flatly rejected. The authorities were grateful to Joseph Knecht for the part he had
played. Here lay the significance of his mission. The further course of Knecht's work
must be regarded in the light of it, since all future efforts at rapprochement would be
built upon this success. He had been granted a vacation -- which could be somewhat
extended if he wished -- and most of the members of the higher authorities had met and
talked with him. His superiors had expressed their confidence in Knecht and had now
charged the Magister Ludi to send him on a special assignment and with broader powers
back to Mariafels, where he was, happily, sure of a friendly reception.
He paused as if to allow time for a question, but Joseph only signified by a
courteous gesture of submission that he was all attention and was awaiting his orders.
"The assignment I have for you now," the Magister went on, "is the following.
We are planning, sooner or later, to establish a permanent embassy of our Order at the
Vatican, if possible on a reciprocal basis. As the younger group, we are ready to adopt a
highly deferential though of course not servile attitude toward Rome; we are quite willing
to accept second place and allow Rome the first. Perhaps -- I am no more sure of it than
Dubois -- the Pope would accept our offer straightaway. But we cannot risk a rebuff. As
it happens, there is a man within our reach whose voice has the greatest influence in
Rome: Father Jacobus. And your assignment is to return to the Benedictine monastery,
live there as you have already done, engage in studies, give an inconsequential course in
the Glass Bead Game, and devote all your attention and care to slowly winning Father
Jacobus over to our side and seeing to it that he promises to support our plans in Rome.
In other words, this time the goal of your mission is precisely defined. It does not matter
much how long you take to achieve it; we imagine that it will require at least a year, but it
might also be two or several years. You are by now acquainted with the Benedictine
tempo and have learned to adjust to it. Under no circumstances must we give the
impression of being impatient or overeager; the affair must ripen of its own accord, right?
I hope you agree to this assignment, and that you will frankly express any objections you
may have. You may have a few days to think it over if you like."
Knecht, for whom the assignment was not such a surprise, thanks to some recent
conversations, replied that he had no need to think it over. He obediently accepted, but
added: "You know, sir, that missions of this kind are most successful when the emissary
has no inner resistances and inhibitions to overcome. I have no reluctance about
accepting; I understand the importance of the task and hope I can do justice to it. But I do
feel a certain anxiety about my future. Be so kind, Magister, to hear me admit my entirely
personal, egotistic concern. I am a Glass Bead Game player. As you know, due to my
mission among the Benedictines I have omitted my studies of the Game for two full
years. I have learned nothing new and have neglected my art. Now at least another year
and probably more will be added. I should not like to fall still further behind during this
time. Therefore I would like to be allowed frequent brief leaves to visit Waldzell and
continual radio contact with the lectures and special exercises of your seminar for
advanced players."
"But of course," the Master said. There was already a note of dismissal in his
tone, but Knecht raised his voice and spoke of his other anxiety: that if his mission in
Mariafels succeeded he might be sent to Rome or employed otherwise for diplomatic
work. "Any such prospect," he concluded, "would have a depressing effect upon me and
hamper my efforts at the monastery. For I would not at all like to be permanently
consigned to the diplomatic service."
The Magister frowned and raised his finger chidingly. "You speak of being
consigned. Really, the word is ill chosen. No one here ever thought of it as a consigning,
but rather as a distinction, a promotion. I am not authorized to give you any information
or make any promises in regard to the way we shall be employing you in the future. But
by a stretch of the imagination I can understand your doubts, and probably I shall be able
to help you if your fears really prove to be justified. And now listen to me: you have a
certain gift for making yourself agreeable and well liked. An enemy might almost call
you a charmer. Presumably this gift of yours prompted the Board to make this second
assignment to the monastery. But do not use your gift too freely, Joseph, and set no
immoderate value on your achievements. If you succeed with Father Jacobus, that will be
the proper moment for you to address a personal request to the Board. Today it seems to
me premature. Let me know when you are ready to leave."
Joseph received these words in silence, laying more weight on the benevolence
behind them than the patent reprimand. Soon thereafter he returned to Mariafels.
There he found the security of a precisely defined task a great benefaction.
Moreover, this task was important and honorable, and in one respect it coincided with his
own deepest desires: to come as close as possible to Father Jacobus and to win his full
friendship. At the monastery he was evidently taken seriously as an envoy now, and was
thought to have been raised in rank. The conduct of the dignitaries of the abbey,
especially Abbot Gervasius himself, made that plain to him. They were as friendly as
ever, but a discernible degree more respectful than before. They no longer treated Joseph
as a young guest of no standing, toward whom they showed civility for the sake of his
origins and out of benevolence toward him personally. He was now received as a highranking Castalian official, given the deference due to an ambassador plenipotentiary. No
longer blind in these matters, Joseph drew his own conclusions.
Nevertheless, he could discover no change in Father Jacobus's attitude toward
him. The old scholar greeted him with friendliness and pleasure. Without waiting to be
asked or reminded, he himself brought up the matter of their working together. Joseph
was deeply touched. He rearranged his schedule; his daily routine was now very different
from what it had been before his vacation. This time the Glass Bead Game course no
longer formed the center of his work and duties. He gave up his studies in the music
archives and his friendly collaboration with the organist. Now his chief concern was the
instruction he received from Father Jacobus: lessons in several branches of historical
science. The monk introduced his special pupil to the background and early history of the
Benedictine Order and to the sources for the early Middle Ages. He set aside a special
hour in which they would read together one of the old chroniclers in the original. Father
Jacobus was not displeased when Knecht pleaded to have young Anton participate in the
lessons; but he had little difficulty persuading Joseph that even the best-intentioned third
party could prove a serious hindrance to this kind of intensely private instruction. In
consequence, Anton, who knew nothing of Knecht's efforts on his behalf, was invited to
take part only in the readings of the chronicler, and was overjoyed. Undoubtedly these
lessons constituted a distinction for the young monk, concerning whose life we have no
further information. They must have been a supreme pleasure and stimulus, for he was
being allowed to share in the work and intellectual exchange of two of the purest and
most original minds of his age. Share, however, is perhaps an exaggeration; for the most
part the young recruit merely listened.
Joseph repaid Father Jacobus by giving him an introduction to the history and
structure of Castalia and the main ideas underlying the Glass Bead Game. This
instruction followed immediately after his own lessons in epigraphy and source work, the
pupil becoming the teacher and the honored teacher an attentive listener and often a
captious critic and questioner. For a long while the reverend Father continued to hold the
whole Castalian mentality in distrust. Because he saw no real religious attitude in it, he
doubted its capacity to rear the kind of human being he could take seriously, despite the
fact that Knecht himself represented so fine a product of Castalian education. Even long
after he had undergone a kind of conversion, insofar as that was possible, through
Knecht's teaching and example, and was prepared to recommend the rapprochement of
Castalia to Rome, this distrust never entirely died. Knecht's notes are full of striking
examples of it, jotted down at the moment. We shall quote from one of them:
Father Jacobus: "You are great scholars and aesthetes, you Castalians. You
measure the weight of the vowels in an old poem and relate the resulting formula to that
of a planet's orbit. That is delightful, but it is a game. And indeed your supreme mystery
and symbol, the Glass Bead Game, is also a game. I grant that you try to exalt this pretty
game into something akin to a sacrament, or at least to a device for edification. But
sacraments do not spring from such endeavors. The game remains a game."
Joseph: "You mean, reverend Father, that we lack the foundation of theology?"
Father Jacobus: "Come now, of theology we will not speak. You are much too far
from that. You could at least do with a few simpler foundations, with a science of man,
for example, a real doctrine and real knowledge about the human race. You do not know
man, do not understand him in his bestiality and as the image of God. All you know is the
Castalian, a special product, a caste, a rare experiment in breeding."
For Knecht, of course, it was an extraordinary piece of good fortune that these
hours of instruction and discourse provided him with the widest field and the most
favorable opportunities to carry out his assignment of gaining Father Jacobus's approval
of Castalia and convincing him of the value of an alliance. The situation in fact was so
favorable to his purposes that he soon began to feel twinges of conscience. He came to
think it shameful and unworthy when they sat together, or strolled back and forth in the
cloisters, that the reverend man should be so trustfully sacrificing his time, when he was
all the while the object of secret political designs. Knecht could not have accepted this
situation in silence for long, and he was already considering just how to make his
disclosure when, to his surprise, the old man anticipated him.
"My dear friend," he said to him with seeming off-handedness one day, "we have
really found our way to a most pleasant and, I would hope, also a fruitful kind of
exchange. The two activities that have been my favorites throughout my life, learning and
teaching, have fused into a fine new combination during our joint working sessions, and
for me that has come at just the right time, for I am beginning to age and cannot imagine
any better cure and refreshment than our lessons. As far as I am concerned, therefore, I
am the one who gains from our exchange. On the other hand, I am not so sure, my friend,
that you and particularly those whose envoy you are and whom you serve will have
profited from the business as much as they may hope. I should like to avert any future
disappointment and would be sorry to have any unclear relationship arise between us.
Therefore permit an old hand a question. I have of course had occasion to think about the
reason for your sojourn in our little abbey, pleasant as it is for me. Until recently, that is
up to the time of your vacation, it seemed to me that the purpose of your presence among
us was not completely clear even to yourself. Was my observation correct?"
"It was."
"Good. Since your return from that vacation, this has changed. You are no longer
puzzling or anxious about the reason for your presence here. You know why you are
here. Am I right? -- Good, then I have not guessed wrong. Presumably I am also not
guessing wrong in my notion of the reason. You have a diplomatic assignment, and it
concerns neither our monastery nor our Abbot, but me. As you see, not very much is left
of your secret. To clarify the situation completely, I shall take the final step and ask you
to inform me fully about the rest of it. What is your assignment?"
Knecht had sprung to his feet and stood facing Fattier Jacobus, surprised,
embarrassed, feeling something close to dismay. "You are right," he cried, "but at the
same time that you relieve me of a burden, you also shame me by speaking first. I have
long been considering how I could manage to give our relationship the clarity you have
established so rapidly. The one saving thing is that my request for instruction and our
agreement fell in the period before my vacation. Otherwise it truly would have seemed as
if the whole thing had been diplomacy on my part, and our studies merely a pretext."
The old man spoke with friendly reassurance: "I merely wanted to help both of us
move forward a step. There is no need for you to aver the purity of your motives. If I
have anticipated you and helped speed the coming of something that also seems desirable
to you, all is well."
After Knecht had told him the nature of his assignment, he commented: "Your
superiors in Castalia are not exactly brilliant diplomats, but they are not so bad either, and
they know a good thing when they see it. I shall give all the consideration to your
mission, and my decision will depend partly on how well you can explain your Castalian
constitution and ideals, and make them seem plausible to me. Let us give ourselves all the
time we need for that." Seeing that Knecht still looked somewhat crestfallen, he gave a
brittle laugh and said: "If you like, you can also regard my proceeding thus as a kind of
lesson. We are two diplomats, and diplomats' intercourse is always a combat, no matter
how friendly a form it may take. In our struggle, as it happens, I was momentarily at a
disadvantage; I had lost the initiative. You knew more than I. Now the balance has been
restored. The chess move was successful; therefore it was the right one."
Knecht thought it important to win Father Jacobus's approval for the Castalian
authorities' project; but it seemed to him far more important to learn as much as possible
from him, and for his own part to serve this learned and powerful man as a reliable guide
to the Castalian world. A good many of Knecht's friends and later disciples envied him as
remarkable men are always envied, not only for their greatness of soul and energy, but
also for their seeming luck, their seeming preferment by destiny. The lesser man sees in
the greater as much as he can see, and Joseph Knecht's career cannot help striking every
observer as unusually brilliant, rapid, and seemingly effortless. Certainly we are tempted
to say of that period in his life: he was lucky. Nor would we wish to try to explain this
"luck" rationalistically or moralistically, either as the causal result of external
circumstances or as a kind of reward for special virtue. Luck has nothing to do with
rationality or morality; by its nature it has about it a quality akin to magic, belonging to a
primitive, more youthful stage of mankind's history. The lucky innocent, showered with
gifts by the fairies, pampered by the gods, is not the object of rational study, and hence
not a fit subject for biographical analysis; he is a symbol who always stands outside the
personal and the historical realms. Nevertheless, there are outstanding men with whose
lives "luck" is intimately bound up, even though that luck may consist merely in the fact
that they and the task proper to their talents actually intersect on the plane of history and
biography, that they are born neither too soon nor too late. Knecht seems to have been
one of these. Thus his life, at least for a considerable part of his way, gives the impression
that everything desirable simply fell into his lap. We do not wish to deny or to gloss over
this aspect of his life. Moreover, we could explain it rationally only by a biographical
method which is not ours, neither desired nor permitted in Castalia; that is, we would
have to enter into an almost unlimited discussion of the most personal, most private
matters, of health and sickness, the oscillations and curves in his vitality and selfconfidence. We are quite sure that any such biographical approach -- which is out of the
question for us -- would reveal a perfect balance between Knecht's "luck" and his
suffering, but nevertheless would falsify our portrayal of his person and his life.
But enough digression. We were saying that many of those who knew Knecht, or
had only heard of him, envied him. Probably few things in his life seemed to lesser folk
so enviable as his relationship to the old Benedictine Father, for he was at one and the
same time pupil and teacher, taker and giver, conquered and conqueror, friend and
collaborator. Moreover, none of Knecht's conquests since his successful courting of Elder
Brother in the Bamboo Grove had given him such happiness. No other had made him feel
so intensely honored and abashed, rewarded and stimulated. Of his later favorite pupils,
almost all have testified to how frequently, gladly, and joyfully he would refer to Father
Jacobus. Knecht learned from the Benedictine something he could scarcely have learned
in the Castalia of those days. He acquired an overview of the methods of historical
knowledge and the tools of historical research, and had his first practice in applying them.
But far beyond that, he experienced history not as an intellectual discipline, but as reality,
as life; and in keeping with that, the transformation and elevation of his own personal life
into history. This was something he could not have learned from a mere scholar. Father
Jacobus was not only far more than a scholar, a seer, and a sage; he was also a mover and
shaper. He had used the position in which fate had placed him not just to warm himself at
the cozy fires of a contemplative existence; he had allowed the winds of the world to
blow through his scholar's den and admitted the perils and forebodings of the age into his
heart. He had taken action, had shared the blame and the responsibility for the events of
his time; he had not contented himself with surveying, arranging, and interpreting the
happenings of the distant past And he had not dealt only with ideas, but with the
refractoriness of matter and the obstinacy of men. Together with his associate and
antagonist, a recently deceased Jesuit, he was regarded as the real architect of the
diplomatic and moral power and the impressive political prestige that the Roman Church
had regained after ages of meekly borne ineffectuality and insignificance.
Although teacher and pupil scarcely ever discussed current politics (the
Benedictine's practice in holding his counsel as well as the younger man's reluctance to
be drawn into such issues combined to prevent that), Father Jacobus's political position
and activities so permeated his mind that all his opinions, all of his glances into the
thicket of the world's squabbles were those of the practical statesman. Not that he was an
ambitious or an intriguing politician. He was no regent and leader, no climber either, but
a councilor and arbitrator, a man whose conduct was tempered by sagacity, whose efforts
were restrained by a profound insight into the inadequacies and difficulties of human
nature, but whose fame, experience, knowledge of men and conditions, as well as his
personal integrity and altruism, had enabled him to gain significant power.
Knecht had known nothing of all this when he came to Mariafels. He had even
been ignorant of Father Jacobus's name. The majority of the inhabitants of Castalia lived
in a state of political innocence and naïveté such as had been quite common among the
professors of earlier ages; they had no political rights and duties, scarcely ever saw a
newspaper. Such was the habit of the average Castalian, such his attitude. Repugnance
for current events, politics, newspapers, was even greater among the Glass Bead Game
players who liked to think of themselves as the real elite, the cream of the Province, and
went to some lengths not to let anything cloud the rarefied atmosphere of their scholarly
and artistic existences. As we have seen, at the time of his first appearance at the
monastery, Knecht had come not as a diplomatic envoy but solely as a teacher of the
Glass Bead Game, and had no political knowledge aside from what Monsieur Dubois had
managed to instil in a few weeks. He was by comparison much more knowing now, but
he had by no means surrendered the Waldzeller's distaste for engaging in current politics.
Although his association with Father Jacobus had awakened hini politically and taught
him a good deal, this had not happened because Knecht was drawn to this realm. It just
happened, as an inevitable though incidental consequence.
In order to add to his equipment and the better to fulfill his honorable task of
lecturing de rebus castaliensibus to his pupil, Father Jacobus, Knecht had brought with
him from Waldzell literature on the constitution and history of the Province, on the
system of the elite schools, and on the evolution of the Glass Bead Game. Some of these
books had served him twenty years before during his struggle with Plinio Designori --
and he had not looked at them since. Others, meant specially for the officials of Castalia,
had been barred to him as a student. Now he read them for the first time. The result was
that at the very time his areas of study were so notably expanding, he was also forced
once again to contemplate, understand, and reinforce his own intellectual and historical
base. In his efforts to present the nature of the Order and of the Castalian system to Father
Jacobus with maximum simplicity and clarity, he inevitably stumbled over the weakest
point in his own and all Castalian education. He found that he himself had only a pale and
rigidly schematic notion of the historical conditions which had led to the foundation of
the Order and everything that followed from it. His picture of the conditions which had
furthered the growth of the new system lacked all vividness and orderliness. Since Father
Jacobus was anything but a passive pupil, the result was an intensified collaboration, an
extremely animated exchange of views. While Joseph tried to present the history of his
Castalian Order, Jacobus helped him to see many aspects of this history in the proper
light for the first time, and to discern its roots in the general history of nations. Because
of the Benedictine's temperament, these discussions often turned into passionate disputes,
and as we shall see they continued to bear fruit years later and remained a vital influence
down to the end of Knecht's life. On the other hand, the close attention Father Jacobus
had given Knecht's exposition, and the thoroughness with which he came to know and
appreciate Castalia, was evidenced by his subsequent conduct. Due to the work of these
two men, there arose between Rome and Castalia a benevolent neutrality and occasional
scholarly exchange which now and then developed into actual co-operation and alliance
and ultimately produced the concord which continues to this day. In time Father Jacobus
asked to be introduced to the theory of the Glass Bead Game -- which he had originally
pooh-poohed -- for he sensed that here lay the secret of the Order and what might be
called its faith or religion. Once he had consented to penetrate into this world he had
hitherto known only from hearsay, and for which he had felt little liking, he resolutely
proceeded in his shrewd and energetic way straight toward its center. And although he
did not become a Glass Bead Game player -- he was in any case far too old for that -- the
devotees of the Game and the Order outside the borders of Castalia had hardly a friend as
earnest and as influential as the great Benedictine.
Now and then, after a session of joint work, Father Jacobus would indicate that he
would be at home to Joseph that evening. After the strenuous lessons and the tense
discussions, those were peaceful hours. Joseph frequently brought his clavichord along,
or a violin, and the old man would sit down at the piano in the gentle light of a candle
whose sweet fragrance of wax filled the small room like the music of Corelli, Scarlatti,
Telemann, or Bach which they played alternately or together. The old man's bedtime
came early, while Knecht, refreshed by these brief musical vespers, would continue his
studies into the night, to the limits his self-discipline permitted. Aside from his lessons
with Father Jacobus, his perfunctory course in the Game, and an occasional Chinese
colloquium with Abbot Gervasius, we also find Knecht engaged at this time in an
elaborate task. He was taking part in the annual competition of the Waldzell elite, from
which he had abstained in the past two years. The competition involved working out
sketches for Games based on three or four prescribed main themes. Stress was placed on
new, bold, and original associations of themes, impeccable logic, and beautiful
calligraphy. Moreover, this was the sole occasion when competitors were permitted to
overstep the bounds of the canon. That is, they could employ new symbols not yet
admitted to the official code and vocabulary of hieroglyphs. This made the competition --
which in any case was the most exciting annual event in Waldzell except for the great
public ceremonial games -- a contest among the most promising advocates of new Game
symbols, and the very highest distinction for a winner in this competition consisted in the
recognition of his proposed additions to the grammar and vocabulary of the Game and
their acceptance into the Game Archives and the Game language. This was a very rare
distinction indeed; usually the winner had to be content only with the ceremonial
performance of his Game as the best candidate's Game of the year. Once, some twentyfive years ago, the great Thomas von der Trave, the present Magister Ludi, had been
awarded this honor with his new abbreviations for the alchemical significance of the
signs of the zodiac -- later, too, Magister Thomas made large contributions to the study
and classification of alchemy as a highly meaningful secret language.
For his entry Knecht chose not to draw on any new Game symbols such as
virtually every candidate had in readiness. He also refrained from using his Game as an
avowal of attachment to the psychological method of Game construction, although that
would have been closer to his inclinations. Instead, he built up a Game modern and
personal enough in its structure and themes, but of transparently clear, classical
composition and strictly symmetrical development in the vein of the old masters. Perhaps
distance from Waldzell and the Game Archives forced him to take this line; perhaps his
historical studies made too great demands on his time and strength; but it may also be that
he was more or less consciously guided by the desire to shape his Game so that it would
correspond as closely as possible to the taste of his teacher and friend, Father Jacobus.
We do not know.
We have used the phrase "psychological method of Game construction," and
perhaps some of our readers will not immediately understand it. In Knecht's day it was a
slogan bandied about a good deal. No doubt all periods have seen currents, vogues,
struggles, and differing views and approaches among the initiates of the Glass Bead
Game. At that time two opposing concepts of the Game called forth controversy and
discussion. The foremost players distinguished two principal types of Game, the formal
and the psychological. We know that Knecht, like Tegularius -- although the latter kept
out of the arguments -- belonged to the champions of the latter type. Knecht, however,
instead of speaking of the "psychological" mode of play usually preferred the word
"pedagogical."
In the formal Game the player sought to compose out of the objective content of
every game, out of the mathematical, linguistic, musical, and other elements, as dense,
coherent, and formally perfect a unity and harmony as possible. In the psychological
Game, on the other hand, the object was to create unity and harmony, cosmic
roundedness and perfection, not so much in the choice, arrangement, interweaving,
association, and contrast of the contents as in the meditation which followed every stage
of the Game. All the stress was placed on this meditation. Such a psychological -- or to
use Knecht's word, pedagogical -- Game did not display perfection to the outward eye.
Rather, it guided the player, by means of its succession of precisely prescribed
meditations, toward experiencing perfection and divinity. "The Game as I conceive it,"
Knecht once wrote to the former Music Master, "encompasses the player after the
completion of meditation as the surface of a sphere encompasses its center, and leaves
him with the feeling that he has extracted from the universe of accident and confusion a
totally symmetrical and harmonious cosmos, and absorbed it into himself."
Knecht's entry, then, was a formally rather than a psychologically constructed
Game. Possibly he wanted to prove to his superiors, and to himself as well, that in spite
of his elementary course and diplomatic mission in Mariafels, he had lost none of his
deftness, elegance, and virtuosity and had not suffered from lack of practice. If so, he
succeeded in proving it. Since the final elaboration and clean copy of his Game outline
could only be completed in the Waldzell Archives, he entrusted this task to his friend
Tegularius, who was himself participating in the competition. Joseph was able to hand his
drafts to his friend personally, and to discuss them with him, as well as to go over
Tegularius's own outline; for Fritz was finally able to come to the monastery for three
days. Magister Thomas had at last authorized the visit, after Knecht had made two
previous requests in vain.
Eager as Tegularius had been to come, and for all the curiosity he, as an insular
Castalian, had about life in the monastery, he felt extremely uncomfortable there.
Sensitive as he was, he nearly fell ill amid all the alien impressions and among these
friendly but simple, healthy, and somewhat rough-hewn people, not one of whom would
have had the slightest understanding for his thoughts, cares, and problems. "You live here
as if you were on another planet," he said to his friend, "and I don't see how you have
been able to stand it for three years. I certainly admire you for that. To be sure, your
Fathers are polite enough toward me, but I feel rejected and repelled by everything here.
Nothing meets me halfway, nothing is natural and easy, nothing can be assimilated
without resistance and pain. If I had to live here for two weeks, I would feel as if I were
in hell."
Knecht had a difficult time with him. Moreover, it was disconcerting to witness,
for the first time as an onlooker, how alien the two Orders, the two worlds were to one
another. He felt, too, that his oversensitive friend with his air of anxious helplessness was
not making a good impression among the monks. Nevertheless, they revised their
respective Game plans for the competition thoroughly, each critically examining the
other's work. When, after an hour of this Knecht went over to Father Jacobus in the other
wing, or to a meal, he had the feeling that he was being suddenly transported from his
native country to an entirely different land, with a different soil and air, different climate,
and different stars.
After Fritz had departed, Joseph drew out Father Jacobus on his impressions. "I
hope," Jacobus said, "that the majority of Castalians are more like you than your friend.
You have shown us an inexperienced, overbred, weakly, and nevertheless, I am afraid,
arrogant kind of person. I shall go on taking you as more representative; otherwise I
should certainly be unjust to your kind. For this unfortunate, sensitive, overintelligent,
fidgety person could spoil one's respect for your whole Province."
"Well," Knecht replied, "I imagine that in the course of the centuries you noble
Benedictines have now and then had sickly, physically feeble, but for that very reason
mentally sound and able men, such as my friend. I suppose it was imprudent of me to
have invited him here, where everyone has a sharp eye for his weaknesses but no sense of
his great virtues. He has done me a great kindness by coming." And he explained to
Father Jacobus about his joining in the competition. The Benedictine was pleased with
Knecht for defending his friend. "Well answered," he said with a friendly laugh. "But it
strikes me that all of your friends are difficult to get along with."
He enjoyed Knecht's bewilderment and astonished expression for a moment, then
added casually: "This time I am referring to someone outside Castalia. Have you heard
anything new about your friend Plinio Designori?"
Joseph's astonishment increased; stunned, he asked for an explanation.
It seemed that Designori had written a political polemic professing violently
anticlerical views, and incidentally strongly attacking Father Jacobus. Through friends in
the Catholic press, Jacobus had obtained information on Designori, and in this way had
learned of Plinio's schooldays in Castalia and his relationship to Knecht.
Joseph asked to borrow Plinio's article; and after he had read it he and Father
Jacobus had their first discussion of current politics. A few more, but only a few,
followed. "It was strange and almost alarming," Joseph wrote to Ferromonte, "for me to
see the figure of our Plinio -- and by-the-by my own -- suddenly standing on the stage of
the world's politics. This was something I had never imagined." As it turned out, Father
Jacobus spoke of Plinio's polemic in rather appreciative terms. At any rate, he showed no
sign of having taken offense. He praised Designori's style, commenting that his training
in the elite school showed up clearly; in the run of everyday politics, one had to settle for
a far lower level of intelligence, he said.
About this time Ferromonte sent Knecht a copy of the first part of his
subsequently famous work entitled The Reception and Absorption of Slavic Folk Music
by German Art Music from Joseph Haydn on. In Knecht's letter of acknowledgment we
find, among other things: "You have drawn a cogent conclusion from your studies, which
I was privileged to share for a while. The two chapters dealing with Schubert, and
especially with the quartets, are among the soundest examples of modern musicology that
I have read. Think of me sometimes; I am very far from any such harvest as you have
reaped. Although I have reason to be content with my life here -- for my mission in
Mariafels appears to be meeting with some success -- I do occasionally feel that being so
far from the Province and the Waldzell circle to which I belong is distinctly oppressive. I
am learning a tremendous amount here, but adding neither to my certainties nor my
professional skills, only to my problems. I must grant, though, a widening of horizon.
However, I now feel much easier about the insecurity, strangeness, despondency,
distraitness, self-doubt, and other ills that frequently assailed me during my first two
years here. Tegularius was here recently -- for only three days, but much as he had looked
forward to seeing me and curious though he was about Mariafels, by the second day he
could scarcely bear it any longer, so depressed and out of place did he feel. Since a
monastery is after all a rather sheltered, peaceful world, and favorable enough to things of
the spirit, in no way hike a jail, a barracks, or a factory, I conclude from my experience
that people from our dear Province are a good deal more pampered and oversensitive than
we realize."
At about the date of this letter to Carlo, Knecht persuaded Father Jacobus to
address a brief letter to the directorate of the Castalian Order acquiescing in the proposed
diplomatic step. To this Jacobus added the request that they would permit "the Glass
Bead Game player Joseph Knecht, who is universally popular here" and who was kindly
giving him a private course de rebus castaliensibus, to remain for a while longer. The
Castalian authorities were, of course, glad to oblige. Joseph, who had been thinking that
he was still very far from any such "harvest," received a commendation, signed by the
directorate and by Monsieur Dubois, congratulating him on the success of his mission.
But what struck him as most important about this honorific document and what gave him
the greatest pleasure (he reported it in well-nigh triumphant tones in a note to Fritz) was a
short sentence to the effect that the Order had been informed by the Magister Ludi of his
desire to return to the Vicus Lusorum, and was disposed to grant this request after
completion of his present assignment. Joseph also read this passage aloud to Father
Jacobus and now confessed how greatly he had feared possible permanent banishment
from Castalia and being sent to Rome. Laughing, Father Jacobus commented: "Yes, my
friend, there is something about Orders; one prefers living in their bosom rather than out
on the periphery, let alone in exile. You've touched the soiled fringes of politics here, but
now go right ahead and forget it, for you are not a politician. But do not break your troth
with history, even though it may remain forever a secondary subject and a hobby for you.
For you had the makings of a historian. And now let us profit by our time together, as
long as I have you."
Joseph Knecht seems to have made little use of his privilege to pay more frequent
visits to Waldzell. However, he listened on the radio to one seminar and to a good many
lectures and games. So also, from afar, sitting in his excellent guest room in the
monastery, he took part in that "solemnity" in the festival hall of the Vicus Lusorum at
which the results of the prize competition were announced. He had handed in a rather
impersonal and not at all revolutionary, but solid and elegant piece of work whose value
he knew, and he was prepared for an honorable mention or a third or second prize. To his
surprise he now heard that he had been awarded first prize, and even before surprise had
given way to delight, the spokesman for the Magister Ludi's office continued reading in
his beautiful low voice and named Tegularius as winner of the second prize. It was
certainly a moving and rapturous experience that the two of them should emerge from
this competition hand in hand, as the crowned winners. He sprang to his feet without
listening to the rest, and ran down the stairs and through the echoing corridors out into
the open air.
In a letter to the former Music Master, written at this time, we may read: "I am
very happy, revered Master, as you can imagine. First the success of my mission and its
commendation by the directorate of the Order, together with the prospect -- so important
to me -- of soon returning home to friends and to the Glass Bead Game, instead of being
kept in the diplomatic service; and now this first prize for a Game whose formal aspects I
did take pains with, but which for good reasons by no means drained me of everything I
had to contribute. And on top of that the joy of sharing this success with my friend -- it
really was too much all at once. I am happy, yes, but I could not well say that I am merry.
Because of the dearth of the preceding period -- at any rate what seemed to me a dearth --
my real feeling is that these fulfillments are coming rather too suddenly and too
abundantly. There is a measure of unease mingled with my gratitude, as if the vessel is so
filled to the brim that only another drop is needed to tilt it. But, please, consider that I
have not said this; in this situation every word is already too much."
As we shall see, the vessel filled to the brim was destined to have more than just
one additional drop added to it. But at the moment Joseph Knecht devoted himself to his
happiness, and the concomitant unease, with great intensity, as if he had a premonition of
the impending great change. For Father Jacobus, too, these few months were a happy, an
exuberant time. He was sorry that he would soon be losing this disciple and associate;
and in their hours of work together, still more in their free-ranging conversations, he tried
to bequeath to him as much as he could of the understanding he had acquired during a
long life of hard work and hard thinking, understanding of the heights and depths in the
lives of men and nations. He also had some things to say about the consequences of
Knecht's mission, assessing its meaning, and the value of amity and political concord
between Rome and Castalia. He recommended that Joseph study the epoch which had
seen the founding of the Castalian Order as well as the gradual recovery of Rome after a
humiliating time of tribulation. He also recommended two books on the Reformation and
schism of the sixteenth century, but strongly urged him to make a principle of studying
the primary sources. He advised Joseph to confine himself to graspable segments of a
field in preference to reading ponderous tomes on world history. Finally, Father Jacobus
made no bones about his profound mistrust of all philosophies of history.
SIX
MAGISTER LUDI
KNECHT HAD DECIDED to postpone his final return to Waldzell until the spring, the
time of the great public Glass Bead Game, the Ludus anniversarius or sollemnis. The era
when annual Games lasted for weeks and were attended by dignitaries and
representatives from all over the world -- what we may call the great age in the
memorable history of these Games -- already belonged forever to the past. But these
spring sessions, with the one solemn Game that usually lasted for ten days to two weeks,
still remained the great festive event of the year for all of Castalia. It was a festival not
without its high religious and moral importance, for it brought together the advocates of
all the sometimes disparate tendencies of the Province in an act of symbolic harmony. It
established a truce between the egotistic ambitions of the several disciplines, and recalled
to mind the unity which embraced their variety. For believers it possessed the
sacramental force of true consecration; for unbelievers it was at least a substitute for
religion; and for both it was a bath in the pure springs of beauty. The Passions of Johann
Sebastian Bach had once upon a time -- not so much in the time they were written as in
the century following their rediscovery -- been in similar fashion a genuine consecratory
act for some of the performers and audience, a form of worship and religious substitute
for others, and for all together a solemn manifestation of art and of the Creator spiritus.
Knecht had had scant difficulty obtaining the consent of both the monks and his
home authorities for his decision. He could not quite determine the nature of his position
after his reassignment to the little republic of the Vicus Lusorum, but he suspected that he
would not long be left unoccupied and would soon be burdened and honored with some
new office or mission. For the present he looked forward happily to returning home, to
seeing his friends and participating in the approaching festival. He enjoyed his last days
with Father Jacobus, and accepted with dignity and good humor the rather demonstrative
kindnesses of the Abbot and monks when the time came for farewells. Then he left,
feeling some sadness at parting from a place he had grown fond of and from a stage in his
life he was now leaving behind, but also in a mood of festive anticipation, for although he
lacked guidance and companions, he had, on his own initiative, scrupulously undertaken
the whole series of meditation exercises prescribed as preparations for the festival Game.
He had not been able to prevail on Father Jacobus to accept the Magister Ludi's formal
invitation to attend the annual Game and accompany him, but this had not affected his
good spirits; he understood the old anti-Castalian's reserved attitude, and he himself for
the moment felt entirely relieved of all duties and restrictions and ready to surrender his
whole mind to the impending ceremonies.
Festivities have their own peculiar nature. A genuine festival cannot go entirely
wrong, unless it is spoiled by the unfortunate intervention of higher powers. For the
devout soul, even in a downpour a procession retains its sacral quality, and a burned feast
does not depress him. For the Glass Bead Game player every annual Game is festive and
in a sense hallowed. Nevertheless, as every one of us knows, there are some festivals and
games in which everything goes right, and every element lifts up, animates, and exalts
every other, just as there are theatrical and musical performances which without any
clearly discernible cause seem to ascend miraculously to glorious climaxes and intensely
felt experiences, whereas others, just as well prepared, remain no more than decent tries.
Insofar as the achievement of intense experiences depends on the emotional state of the
spectator, Joseph Knecht had the best imaginable preparation: he was troubled by no
cares, returning from abroad loaded with honors, and looking forward with joyous
anticipation to the coming event.
Nevertheless, this time the Ludus sollemnis was not destined to be touched by that
aura of the miraculous and so rise to a special degree of consecration and radiance. It
turned out, in fact, a cheerless, distinctly unhappy, and something very close to an
unsuccessful Game. Although many of the participants may have felt edified and exalted
all the same, the real actors and organizers of the Game, as always in such cases, felt all
the more inexorably that atmosphere of apathy, lack of grace and failure, of inhibition
and bad luck which overshadowed this festival. Knecht, although he of course sensed it
and found his high expectations somewhat dashed, was by no means among those who
felt the fiasco most keenly. Even though the solemn act failed to reach the true peak of
perfection and blessing, he was able, because he was not playing and bore no
responsibility for it, to follow the ingeniously constructed Game appreciatively, as a
devout spectator, to let the meditations quiver to a halt undisturbed, and with grateful
devotion to share that experience so familiar to all guests at these Games: the sense of
ceremony and sacrifice, of mystic union of the congregation at the feet of the divine,
which could be conveyed even by a ceremony that, for the narrow circle of initiates, was
regarded as a "failure." Nevertheless, he too was not altogether unaffected by the unlucky
star that seemed to preside over this festival. The Game itself, to be sure, was
irreproachable in plan and construction, like every one of Master Thomas's Games; in
fact it was one of his cleanest, most direct, and impressive achievements. But its
performance was specially ill-starred and has not yet been forgotten in the history of
Waldzell.
When Knecht arrived, a week before the opening of the great Game, he was
received not by the Magister Ludi himself, but by his deputy Bertram, who welcomed
him courteously but informed him rather curtly and distractedly that the venerable Master
had recently fallen ill and that he, Bertram, was not sufficiently informed about Knecht's
mission to receive his report. Would he therefore go to Hirsland to report his return to the
directorate of the Order and await its commands.
As he took his leave Knecht involuntarily betrayed, by tone or gesture, his
surprise at the coolness and shortness of his reception. Bertram apologized. "Do forgive
me if I have disappointed you, and please understand my situation," he said. "The
Magister is ill, the annual Game is upon us, and everything is up in the air. I don't know
whether the Magister will be able to conduct the Game or whether I shall have to leap
into the breach." The revered Master's illness could not have come at a more difficult
moment, he went on to say. He was ready as always to assume the Magister's official
duties, but if in addition he had to prepare himself at such short notice to conduct the
great Game, he was afraid it would prove a task beyond his powers.
Knecht felt sorry for the man, who was so obviously depressed and thrown off
balance; he was also sorry that the responsibility for the festival might now lie in the
deputy's hands. Joseph had been away from Waldzell too long to know how well founded
Bertram's anxiety was. The worst thing that can happen to a deputy had already befallen
the man: some time past he had forfeited the trust of the elite, so that he was truly in a
very difficult position.
With considerable concern, Knecht thought of the Magister Ludi, that great
exponent of classical form and irony, the perfect Master and Castalian. He had looked
forward eagerly to the Magister's receiving him, listening to his report, and reinstalling
him in the small community of players, perhaps in some confidential post. It had been his
desire to see the festival Game presided over by Master Thomas, to continue working
under him and courting his recognition. Now it was painful and disappointing to find the
Magister withdrawn into illness, and to be directed to other authorities. There was,
however, some compensation in the respectful good will with which the secretary of the
Order and Monsieur Dubois received him and heard him out. They treated him, in fact, as
a colleague. During their first talk he discovered that for the present at any rate they had
no intention of using him to promote the Roman project. They were going to respect his
desire for a permanent return to the Game. For the moment they extended a friendly
invitation to him to stay in the guesthouse of the Vicus Lusorum, attend the annual Game,
and survey the situation. Together with his friend Tegularius, he devoted the days before
the public ceremonies to the exercises in fasting and meditation. That was one of the
reasons he was able to witness in so devout and grateful a spirit the strange Game which
has left an unpleasant aftertaste in the memories of some.
The position of the deputy Masters, also called "Shadows," is a very peculiar one
-- especially the deputies to the Music Master and the Glass Bead Game Master. Every
Magister has a deputy who is not provided for him by the authorities. Rather, he himself
chooses his deputy from the narrow circle of his own candidates. The Master himself
bears the full responsibility for all the actions and decisions of his deputy. For a candidate
it is therefore a great distinction and a sign of the highest trust when he is appointed
deputy by his Magister. He is thereby recognized as the intimate associate and right hand
of the all-powerful Magister. Whenever the Magister is prevented from performing his
official duties, he sends the deputy in his stead. The deputy, however, is not entitled to act
in all capacities. For example, when the Supreme Board votes, he may transmit only a
yea or nay in the Master's name and is never permitted to deliver an address or present
motions on his own. There are a variety of other precautionary restrictions on the
deputies.
While the appointment elevates the deputy to a very high and at times extremely
exposed position, it is at a certain price. The deputy is set apart within the official
hierarchy, and while he enjoys high honor and frequently may be entrusted with
extremely important functions, his position deprives him of certain rights and
opportunities which the other aspirants possess. There are two points in particular where
this is revealed: the deputy does not bear the responsibility for his official acts, and he
can rise no farther within the hierarchy. The law is unwritten, to be sure, but can be read
throughout the history of Castalia: At the death or resignation of a Magister, his Shadow,
who has represented him so often and whose whole existence seems to predestine him for
the succession, has never advanced to fill the Master's place. It is as if custom were
determined to show that a seemingly fluid and movable barrier is in fact insuperable. The
barrier between Magister and deputy stands like a symbol for the barrier between the
office and the individual. Thus, when a Castalian accepts the confidential post of deputy,
he renounces the prospect of ever becoming a Magister himself, of ever really possessing
the official robes and insignia that he wears so often in his representative role. At the
same time he acquires the curiously ambiguous privilege of never incurring any blame
for possible mistakes in his conduct of his office. The blame falls upon his Magister, who
is answerable for his acts. A Magister sometimes becomes the victim of the deputy he has
chosen and is forced to resign his office because of some glaring error committed by the
deputy. The word "Shadow" originated in Waldzell to describe the Magister Ludi's
deputy. It is splendidly apposite to his special position, his closeness amounting to quasiidentity with the Magister, and the make-believe insubstantiality of his official existence.
For many years Master Thomas von der Trave had employed a Shadow named
Bertram who seems to have been more lacking in luck than in talent or good will. He was
an excellent Glass Bead Game player, of course. As a teacher he was at least adequate,
and he was also a conscientious official, absolutely devoted to his Master. Nevertheless,
in the course of the past few years, he had become distinctly unpopular. The "new
generation," the younger members of the elite, were particularly hostile to him, and since
he did not possess his Master's limpid, chivalric temperament, this antagonism affected
his poise. The Magister did not let him go, but had for years shielded him from friction
with the elite as much as possible, putting him in the public eye more and more rarely and
employing him largely in the chanceries and the Archives.
This blameless but disliked man, plainly not favored by fortune, now suddenly
found himself at the head of the Vicus Lusorum due to his Master's illness. If it should
turn out that he had to conduct the annual Game, he would occupy for the duration of the
festival the most exposed position in the entire Province. He could only have coped with
this great task if the majority of the Glass Bead Game players, or at any rate the tutors as
a body, had supported him. Regrettably, that did not happen. This was why the Ludus
sollemnis turned into a severe trial and very nearly a disaster for Waldzell.
Not until the day before the Game was it officially announced that the Magister
had fallen seriously ill and would be unable to conduct the Game. We do not know
whether this postponement of the announcement had been dictated by the sick Magister,
who might have hoped up to the last moment that he would be able to pull himself
together and preside. Probably he was already too ill to cherish any such ideas, and his
Shadow made the mistake of leaving Castalia in uncertainty about the situation in
Waldzell up to the last moment. Granted, it is even disputable whether this delay was
actually a mistake. Undoubtedly it was done with good intentions, in order not to
discredit the festival from the start and discourage the admirers of Master Thomas from
attending. And had everything turned out well, had there been a relation of confidence
between the Waldzell community of players and Bertram, the Shadow might actually
have become his representative and -- this is really quite conceivable -- the Magister's
absence might have gone almost unnoticed. It is idle to speculate further about the matter;
we have mentioned it only because we thought it necessary to suggest that Bertram was
not such an absolute failure, let alone unworthy of his office, as public opinion in
Waldzell regarded him at that time. He was far more a victim than a culprit.
As happened every year, guests poured into Waldzell to attend the great Game.
Many arrived unsuspectingly; others were deeply anxious about the Magister Ludi's
health and had gloomy premonitions about the prospects of the festival. Waldzell and the
nearby villages filled with people. Almost every one of the directors of the Order and the
members of the Board of Educators were on hand. Travelers in holiday mood arrived
from the remoter parts of the country and from abroad, crowding the guest houses.
On the evening before the beginning of the Game, the ceremonies opened with the
meditation hour. In response to the ringing of bells the whole of Waldzell, crowded with
people as it was, subsided into a profound, reverent silence. Next morning came the first
of the musical performances and announcement of the first movement of the Game,
together with meditation on the two musical themes of this movement. Bertram, in the
Magister Ludi's festival robes, displayed a stately and controlled demeanor, but he was
very pale. As day followed day, he looked more and more strained, suffering and
resigned, until during the last days he really resembled a shadow. By the second day of
the Game the rumor spread that Magister Thomas's condition had worsened, and that his
life was in danger. That evening there cropped up here and there, and especially among
the initiates, those first contributions to the gradually developing legend about the sick
Master and his Shadow. This legend, emanating from the innermost circle of the Vicus
Lusorum, the tutors, maintained that the Master had been willing and would have been
able to conduct the Game, but that he had sacrificed himself to his Shadow's ambition
and assigned the solemn task to Bertram. But now, the legend continued, since Bertram
did not seem equal to his lofty role, and since the Game was proving a disappointment,
the sick man felt to blame for the failure of the Game and his Shadow's inadequacy, and
was doing penance for the mistake. This, it was said, this and nothing else was the reason
for the rapid deterioration of his condition and the rise in his fever.
Naturally this was not the sole version of the legend, but it was the elite's version
and indicated that the ambitious aspirants thought the situation appalling and were dead
set against doing anything to improve it. Their reverence for the Master was balanced by
their malice for his Shadow; they wanted Bertram to fail even if the Master himself had
to suffer as well.
By and by the story went the rounds that the Magister on his sickbed had begged
his deputy and two seniors of the elite to keep the peace and not endanger the festival.
The next day it was asserted that he had dictated his will and had named the man he
desired for his successor. Moreover, names were whispered. These and other rumors
circulated along with news of the Magister's steadily worsening condition, and from day
to day spirits sagged in the festival hall as well as in the guest houses, although no one
went so far as to abandon the festival and depart. Gloom hung over the entire
performance all the while that it proceeded outwardly with formal propriety. Certainly
there was little of that delight and uplift that everyone familiar with the annual festival
expected; and when on the day before the end of the game Magister Thomas, the author
of the festival Game, closed his eyes forever, not even the efforts of the authorities could
prevent the news from spreading. Curiously, a good many participants felt relieved and
liberated by this outcome. The Game students, and the elite in particular, were not
permitted to don mourning before the end of the Ludus sollemnis, nor to make any break
in the strictly prescribed sequence of the hours, with their alternation of performances and
meditation exercises. Nevertheless, they unanimously went through the last act and day
of the festival as if it were a funeral service for the revered deceased. They surrounded
the exhausted, pale, and sleepless Bertram, who continued officiating with half-closed
eyes, with a frigid atmosphere of isolation.
Joseph Knecht had been kept in close contact with the elite by his friend
Tegularius. As an old player, moreover, he was fully sensitive to all these currents and
moods. But he did not allow them to affect him. From the fourth or fifth day on he
actually forbade Fritz to bother him with news about the Magister's illness. He felt, and
quite well understood, the tragic cloud that hung over the festival; he thought of the
Master with sorrow and deep concern, and of the Shadow Bertram -- condemned as it
were to sharing the Magister's death -- with growing disquiet and compassion. But he
sternly resisted being influenced by any authentic or mythical account, practiced the
strictest concentration, surrendered gladly to the exercises and the course of the
beautifully structured game, and in spite of all the discords and dark clouds his
experience of the festival was one of grave exaltation.
At the end of the festival Bertram was spared the additional burden of having to
receive congratulants and the Board in his capacity of vice-Magister. The traditional
celebration for students of the Glass Bead Game was also cancelled. Immediately after
the final musical performance of the festival, the Board announced the Magister's death,
and the prescribed days of mourning began in the Vicus Lusorum. Joseph Knecht, still
residing in the guest house, participated in the rites. The funeral of this fine man, whose
memory is still held in high esteem, was celebrated with Castalia's customary simplicity.
His Shadow, Bertram, who had summoned up his last reserves of strength in order to play
his part to the end during the festival, understood his situation. He asked for a leave and
went on a walking trip in the mountains.
There was mourning throughout the Game village, and indeed everywhere in
Waldzell. Possibly no one had enjoyed intimate, strikingly friendly relations with the
deceased Magister; but the superiority and flawlessness of his aristocratic nature, together
with his intelligence and his finely developed feeling for form, had made of him a regent
and representative such as Castalia with its fundamentally democratic temper did not
often produce. The Castalians had been proud of him. If he had seemed to hold himself
aloof from the realms of passion, love, and friendship, that made him all the more the
object for youth's craving to venerate. This dignity and sovereign gracefulness -- which
incidentally had earned him the half-affectionate nickname "His Excellency" -- had in the
course of years, despite strong opposition, won him a special position in the Supreme
Council of the Order and in the sessions and work of the Board of Educators.
Naturally, the question of his successor was hotly discussed, and nowhere so
intensely as among the elite of the Glass Bead Game players. After the departure of the
Shadow, whose overthrow these players had sought and achieved, the functions of the
Magister's office were temporarily distributed by vote of the elite itself among three
temporary deputies -- only the internal functions in the Vicus Lusorum, of course, not the
official work in the Board of Educators. In keeping with tradition, the Board would not
permit the Magistracy to remain vacant more than three weeks. In cases in which a dying
or departing Magister left a clear, uncontested successor, the office was in fact filled
immediately, after only a single plenary session of the Board. This time the process
would probably take rather longer.
During the period of mourning, Joseph Knecht occasionally talked with his friend
about the festival game and its singularly troubled course.
"This deputy, Bertram," Knecht said, "not only played his part tolerably well right
up to the end -- that is, tried to fill the role of a real Magister -- but in my opinion did far
more than that. He sacrificed himself to this Ludus sollemnis as his last and most solemn
official act. You all were harsh -- no, the word is cruel -- to him. You could have saved
the festival and saved Bertram, and you did not do so. I don't care to express an opinion
about that conduct; I suppose you had your reasons. But now that poor Bertram has been
eliminated and you have had your way, you should be generous. When he comes back
you must meet him halfway and show that you have understood his sacrifice."
Tegularius shook his head. "We did understand it," he said, "and have accepted it.
You were fortunate in being able to participate in the Game as a guest; as such you
probably did not follow the course of events so very closely. No, Joseph, we will not
have any opportunity to act on whatever feelings for Bertram we may have. He knows
that his sacrifice was necessary and will not attempt to undo it."
Only now did Knecht fully understand him. He fell into a troubled silence. Now
he realized that he had not experienced these festival days as a real Waldzeller and a
comrade of the others, but in truth much more like a guest; and only now did he grasp the
nature of Bertram's sacrifice. Hitherto Bertram had seemed to him an ambitious man who
had been undone by a task beyond his powers and who henceforth must renounce further
ambitious goals and try to forget that he had once been a Master's Shadow and the leader
of an annual Game. Only now, hearing his friend's last words, had he understood -- with
shock -- that Bertram had been fully condemned by his judges and would not return.
They had allowed him to conduct the festival Game to its conclusion, and had cooperated just enough so that it would go off without a public scandal; but they had done
so only to spare Waldzell, not Bertram.
The fact was that the position of Shadow demanded more than the Magister's full
confidence -- Bertram had not lacked that. It depended to an equal degree on the
confidence of the elite, and the unfortunate man had been unable to retain it. If he
blundered, the hierarchy did not stand behind him to protect him, as it did behind his
Master and model. And without the backing of such authority, he was at the mercy of his
former comrades, the tutors. If they did not respect him, they became his judges. If they
were unyielding, the Shadow was finished. Sure enough, Bertram did not return from his
outing in the mountains, and after a while the story went round that he had fallen to his
death from a cliff. The matter was discussed no further.
Meanwhile, day after day high officials and directors of the Order and of the
Board of Educators appeared in the Game village. Members of the elite and of the civil
service were summoned for questioning. Now and then some of the matters discussed
leaked out, but only within the elite itself. Joseph Knecht, too, was summoned and
queried, once by two directors of the Order, once by the philological Magister, then by
Monsieur Dubois, and again by two Magisters. Tegularius, who was also called in for
several such consultations, was pleasantly excited and joked about this conclave
atmosphere, as he called it. Joseph had already noticed during the festival how little of his
former intimacy with the elite had remained, and during the period of the conclave he
was made more painfully aware of it. It was not only that he lived in the guest house like
a visitor, and that the superiors seemed to deal with him as an equal. The members of the
elite themselves, the tutors as a body, no longer received him in a comradely fashion.
They displayed a mocking politeness toward him, or at best a temporizing coolness. They
had already begun to drift away from him when he received his appointment to Mariafels,
and that was only right and natural. Once a man had taken the step from freedom to
service, from the life of student or tutor to member of the hierarchy, he was no longer a
comrade, but on the way to becoming a superior or boss. He no longer belonged to the
elite, and he had to realize that for the time being they would assume a critical attitude
toward him. That happened to everyone in his position. The difference was that he felt
the aloofness and coolness with particular intensity at this time, partly because the elite,
orphaned as it now was and about to receive a new Magister, defensively closed its ranks;
partly because it had just so harshly demonstrated its ruthlessness in the case of the
Shadow, Bertram.
One evening Tegularius came running to the guest house in a state of extreme
excitement. He found Joseph, drew him into an empty room, closed the door behind him,
and burst out: "Joseph, Joseph! My God, I should have guessed it, I ought to have known,
it was likely enough. . . Oh, I'm altogether beside myself and truly don't know whether I
ought to be glad." And he, who was privy to all the sources of information in the Game
village, babbled on: it was more than probable, already virtually certain, that Joseph
Knecht would be elected Master of the Glass Bead Game. The director of the Archives,
whom many had regarded as Master Thomas's predestined successor, had obviously been
eliminated from the sifted group of prospects the day before yesterday. Of the three
candidates from the elite whose names had hitherto headed the lists during the inquiries,
none, apparently, enjoyed the special favor and recommendation of a Magister or of the
directors of the Order. On the other hand, two directors of the Order as well as Monsieur
Dubois were supporting Knecht. In addition to that, there was the weighty vote of the
former Music Master, who to the certain knowledge of several persons had been
consulted by several Masters.
"Joseph, they're going to make you Magister!" Fritz exclaimed once more.
Whereupon his friend placed his hand over his mouth. For a moment Joseph had been no
less surprised and stirred by the possibility than Fritz, and it had seemed to him altogether
impossible. But even while Tegularius was reporting the various opinions circulating in
the Game village about the status and course of the "conclave," Knecht began to realize
that his friend's guess was not likely to be wrong. Rather, in his heart he felt something
akin to assent, a sense that he had known and expected this all along, that it was right and
natural. And so he placed his hand on his excited friend's mouth, gave him an aloof,
reproving look, as if he had suddenly been removed to a great distance, and said: "Don't
talk so much, amice; I don't want to hear this gossip. Go to your comrades."
Tegularius, though he had meant to say a great deal more, fell silent at once. He
turned pale under the gaze of this utter stranger, and went out. Later he remarked that at
first he had felt Knecht's remarkable calm and iciness at this moment as if it were a blow
and an insult, a slap in the face and a betrayal of their old friendship and intimacy, an
almost incomprehensible overstressing and anticipation of his impending position as
supreme head of the Glass Bead Game. Only as he was leaving -- and he actually went
out like a man who had been slapped -- did the meaning of that unforgettable look dawn
on him, that remote, royal, but likewise suffering look, and he realized that his friend was
not proud of what had fallen to his lot, but that he was accepting it in humility. He had
been reminded, he said, of Joseph Knecht's thoughtful expression and the note of deep
compassion in his voice when, recently, he had inquired about Bertram and his sacrifice.
It was as if he himself were now on the point of sacrificing and extinguishing himself like
the Shadow. His expression had been at once proud and humble, exalted and submissive,
lonely and resigned; it was as if Joseph Knecht's face had become an effigy of all the
Masters of Castalia who had ever been. "Go to your comrades," he had said. Thus, in the
very second he first heard of his new dignity, this incomprehensible man had fitted
himself into it and saw the world from a new center, was no longer a comrade, would
