Before the Law
 BEFORE THE LAW stands a doorkeeper. To this doorkeeper there comes a man
from the country and prays for admittance to the Law. But the doorkeeper says that he
cannot grant admittance at the moment. The man thinks it over and then asks if he
will be allowed in later. "It is possible," says the doorkeeper, "but not at the moment."
Since the gate stands open, as usual, and the doorkeeper steps to one side, the man
stoops to peer through the gateway into the interior. Observing that, the doorkeeper
laughs and says: "If you are so drawn to it, just try to go in despite my veto. But take
note: I am powerful. And I am only the least of the doorkeepers. From hall to hall
there is one doorkeeper after another, each more powerful than the last. The third
doorkeeper is already so terrible that even I cannot bear to look at him." These are
difficulties the man from the country has not expected; the Law, he thinks, should
surely be accessible at all times and to everyone, but as he now takes a closer look at
the doorkeeper in his fur coat, with his big sharp nose and long, thin, black Tartar
beard, he decides that it is better to wait until he gets permission to enter. The
doorkeeper gives him a stool and lets him sit down at one side of the door. There he
sits for days and years. He makes many attempts to be admitted, and wearies the
doorkeeper by his importunity. The doorkeeper frequently has little interviews with
him, asking him questions about his home and many other things, but the questions
are put indifferently, as great lords put them, and always finish with the statement that
$ 22
he cannot be let in yet. The man, who has furnished himself with many things for his
journey, sacrifices all he has, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper. The
doorkeeper accepts everything, but always with the remark: "I am only taking it to
keep you from thinking you have omitted anything." During these many years the man
fixes his attention almost continuously on the doorkeeper. He forgets the other
doorkeepers, and this first one seems to him the sole obstacle preventing access to the
Law. He curses his bad luck, in his early years boldly and loudly; later, as he grows old,
he only grumbles to himself. He becomes childish, and since in his yearlong
contemplation of the doorkeeper he has come to know even the fleas in his fur collar,
he begs the fleas as well to help him and to change the doorkeeper's mind. At length
his eyesight begins to fail, and he does not know whether the world is really darker or
whether his eyes are only deceiving him. Yet in his darkness he is now aware of a
radiance that streams inextinguishably from the gateway of the Law. Now he has not
very long to live. Before he dies, all his experiences in these long years gather
themselves in his head to one point, a question he has not yet asked the doorkeeper.
He waves him nearer, since he can no longer raise his stiffening body. The doorkeeper
has to bend low toward him, for the difference in height between them has altered
much to the man's disadvantage. "What do you want to know now?" asks the
doorkeeper; "you are insatiable." "Everyone strives to reach the Law," says the man, "so
how does it happen that for all these many years no one but myself has ever begged for
admittance?" The doorkeeper recognizes that the man has reached his end, and, to let
his failing senses catch the words, roars in his ear: "No one else could ever be admitted
here, since this gate was made only for you. I am now going to shut it."
$
An Imperial Message
 THE EMPEROR,so a parable runs, has sent a message to you, the humble subject,
the insignificant shadow cowering in the remotest distance before the imperial sun;
the Emperor from his deathbed has sent a message to you alone. He has commanded
the messenger to kneel down by the bed, and has whispered the message to him; so
much store did he lay on it that he ordered the messenger to whisper it back into his
ear again. Then by a nod of the head he has confirmed that it is right. Yes, before the
assembled spectators of his death -- all the obstructing walls have been broken down,
and on the spacious and loftily mounting open staircases stand in a ring the great
princes of the Empire -- before all these he has delivered his message. The messenger
immediately sets out on his journey; a powerful, an indefatigable man; now pushing
with his right arm, now with his left, he cleaves a way for himself through the throng;
if he encounters resistance he points to his breast, where the symbol of the sun glitters;
the way is made easier for him than it would be for any other man. But the multitudes
are so vast; their numbers have no end. If he could reach the open fields how fast he
would fly, and soon doubtless you would hear the welcome hammering of his fists on
your door. But instead how vainly does he wear out his strength; still he is only making
his way through the chambers of the innermost palace; never will he get to the end of
them; and if he succeeded in that nothing would be gained; he must next fight his way
down the stair; and if he succeeded in that nothing would be gained; the courts would
still have to be crossed; and after the courts the second outer palace; and once more
stairs and courts; and once more another palace; and so on for thousands of years; and
if at last he should burst through the outermost gate -- but never, never can that
happen -- the imperial capital would lie before him, the center of the world, crammed
to bursting with its own sediment. Nobody could fight his way through here even with
a message from a dead man. But you sit at your window when evening falls and dream
it to yourself.
$ 24
THE LONGER STORIES
Description of a Struggle
 And people in their Sunday best
 Stroll about, swaying over the gravel
 Under this enormous sky
 Which, from hills in the distance,
 Stretches to distant hills.
I
 AT ABOUT MIDNIGHT A few people rose, bowed, shook hands, said it had been a
pleasant evening, and then passed through the wide doorway into the vestibule, to put
on their coats. The hostess stood in the middle of the room and made graceful bowing
movements, causing the dainty folds in her skirt to move up and down.
 I sat at a tiny table -- it had three curved, thin legs -- sipping my third glass of
benedictine, and while I drank I surveyed my little store of pastry which I myself had
picked out and arranged in a pile.
$ 25
 Then I saw my new acquaintance, somewhat dishevelled and out of shape,
appear at the doorpost of an adjoining room; but I tried to look away for it was no
concern of mine. He, however, came toward me and, smiling absent-mindedly at my
occupation, said: "Excuse me for disturbing you, but until this very moment I've been
sitting alone with my girl in the room next door. Ever since half-past ten. Lord, what
an evening! I know it isn't right for me to be telling you this, for we hardly know one
another. We only met on the stairs this evening and exchanged a few words as guests
of the same house. And now -- but you must forgive me, please -- my happiness just
cannot be contained, I can't help it. And since I have no other acquaintance here
whom I can trust --"
 I looked at him sadly -- the piece of fruitcake which I had in my mouth did not
taste particularly good -- and said into his rather flushed face: "I'm glad of course that
you consider me trustworthy, but displeased that you have confided in me. And you
yourself, if you weren't in such a state, would know how improper it is to talk about an
amorous girl to a man sitting alone drinking schnapps."
 When I said this, he sat down with a jolt, leaned back in his chair, and let his
arms hang down. Then he pressed them back, his elbows pointed, and began talking in
rather a loud voice: "Only a little while ago we were alone in that room, Annie and I.
And I kissed her, I kissed her -- her mouth, her ears, her shoulders. Oh, my Lord and
Savior!"
 A few guests, suspecting ours to be a rather more animated conversation,
approached us closer, yawning. Whereupon I stood up and said so that all could hear:
"All right then, if you insist, I'll go with you, but I repeat: it's ridiculous to climb up the
Laurenziberg now, in winter and in the middle of the night. Besides, it's freezing, and
as it has been snowing the roads out there are like skating rinks. Well, as you like --"
 At first he gazed at me in astonishment and parted his wet lips; but then,
noticing the guests who had approached quite close, he laughed, stood up, and said: "I
$ 26
think the cold will do us good; our clothes are full of heat and smoke; what's more, I'm
slightly tipsy without having drunk very much; yes, let's say goodbye and go."
 So we went to the hostess, and as he kissed her hand she said: "I am glad to see
you looking so happy today."
 Touched by the kindness of these words, he kissed her hand again; whereupon
she smiled. I had to drag him away. In the vestibule stood a housemaid, whom we
hadn't seen before. She helped us into our coats and then took a small lantern to light
us down the stairs. Her neck was bare save for a black velvet ribbon around her throat;
her loosely clothed body was stooped and kept stretching as she went down the stairs
before us, holding the lantern low. Her cheeks were flushed, for she had drunk some
wine, and in the weak lamplight which filled the whole stairwell, I could see her lips
trembling.
 At the foot of the stairs she put down the lantern, took a step toward my
acquaintance, embraced him, kissed him, and remained in the embrace. Only when I
pressed a coin into her hand did she drowsily detach her arms from him, slowly open
the front door, and let us out into the night.
 Over the deserted, evenly lit street stood a large moon in a slightly clouded, and
therefore unusually extended, sky. On the frozen snow one had to take short steps.
 Hardly were we outside when I evidently began to feel very gay. I raised my
legs, let my joints crack, I shouted a name down the street as though a friend of mine
had just vanished around the corner; leaping, I threw my hat in the air and caught it
boastfully.
 My acquaintance, however, walked on beside me, unconcerned. He held his
head bent. He didn't even speak.
$ 27
 This surprised me, for I had calculated that he, once I had got him away from
the party, would give vent to his joy. Now I too could calm down. No sooner had I
given him an encouraging slap on the back than I suddenly no longer understood his
mood, and withdrew my hand. Since I had no use for it, I stuck it in the pocket of my
coat.
 So we walked on in silence. Listening to the sound of our steps, I couldn't
understand why I was incapable of keeping step with my acquaintance -- especially
since the air was clear and I could see his legs quite plainly. Here and there someone
leaned out of a window and watched us.
 On turning into the Ferdinandstrasse I realized that my acquaintance had
begun to hum a melody from the Dollar Princess. It was low, but I could hear it
distinctly. What did this mean? Was he trying to insult me? As for me, I was ready to
do without not only this music, but the walk as well. Why wasn't he speaking to me,
anyway? And if he didn't need me, why hadn't he left me in peace in the warm room
with the benedictine and the pastry? It certainly wasn't I who had insisted on this walk.
Besides, I could have gone for a walk on my own. I had merely been at a party, had
saved an ungrateful young man from disgrace, and was now wandering about in the
moonlight. That was all right, too. All day in the office, evenings at a party, at night in
the streets, and nothing to excess. A way of life so natural that it borders on the
excessive!
 Yet my acquaintance was still behind me. Indeed, he even quickened his steps
when he realized that he had fallen in the rear. No word was uttered, nor could it be
said that we were running. But I wondered if it wouldn't be a good idea to turn down a
side street; after all, I wasn't obliged to go on this walk with him. I could go home
alone and no one could stop me. Then, secretly, I could watch my acquaintance pass
the entrance to my street. Goodbye, dear acquaintance! On reaching my room I'll feel
warm, I'll light the lamp in its iron stand on my table, and when I've done that I'll lie
$ 28
back in my armchair which stands on the torn Oriental carpet. Pleasant prospects!
Why not? But then? No then. The lamp will shine in the warm room, shine on my
chest as I lie in the armchair. Then I'll cool off and spend hours alone between the
painted walls and the floor which, reflected in the gilt-framed mirror hanging on the
rear wall, appears slanted.
 My legs were growing tired and I had already decided to go home and lie down,
when I began to wonder if, before going away, I ought to say good night to my
acquaintance. But I was too timid to go away without a word and too weak to call to
him out loud. So I stood still, leaned against the moonlit wall of a house, and waited.
 My acquaintance came sailing along the pavement toward me as fast as though
he expected me to catch him. He winked at me, suggesting some agreement which I
had apparently forgotten.
 "What's up?" I asked.
 "Oh, nothing," he said. "I only wanted to ask your opinion about that
housemaid who kissed me on the staircase. Who is the girl? Have you ever seen her
before? No? Nor have I. Was she a housemaid at all? I had meant to ask you this
before, while she was walking down the stairs in front of us."
 "I saw at once by her red hands that she's a housemaid, and not even the first
housemaid, and when I gave her the money I felt her hard skin."
 "But that merely proves that she has been some time in service, which no doubt
is the case."
 "You may be right about that. In that light one couldn't distinguish everything,
but her face reminded me of the elder daughter of an officer I happen to know."
$ 29
 "Not me," he said.
 "That won't stop me going home; it's late and I have to be in the office early.
One sleeps badly there." Whereupon I put out my hand to say goodbye to him.
 "Whew, what a cold hand!" he cried. "I wouldn't like to go home with a hand
like that. You should have let yourself be kissed, too, my friend. That was an omission.
Still, you can make up for it. But sleep? On a night like this? What an idea! Just think
how many thoughts a blanket smothers while one lies alone in bed, and how many
unhappy dreams it keeps warm."
 "I neither smother anything nor warm anything," I said.
 "Oh, go on!" he concluded, "you're a humorist!"
 At the same time he began walking again and I followed without realizing it, for
I was busy thinking of what he had said.
 From these words I imagined that my acquaintance suspected in me something
which, although it wasn't there, made me nevertheless rise in his estimation by his
suspecting it. So it was just as well I hadn't gone home. Who knows, this man --
thinking of housemaid affairs while walking beside me, his mouth steaming with cold -
- might be capable of bestowing on me in the eyes of the world a value without my
having to work for it. Let's pray the girls won't spoil him! By all means let them kiss
and hug him, that's their duty and his right, but they mustn't carry him off. After all,
when they kiss him they also kiss me a little -- with the corners of their mouths, so to
speak. But if they carry him off, then they steal him from me. And he must always
remain with me, always. Who is to protect him, if not I? And he's so stupid. Someone
says to him in February: Come up the Laurenziberg -- and off he goes. And supposing
he falls down now, or catches cold? Suppose some jealous man appears from the
Postgasse and attacks him? What will happen to me? Am I to be just kicked out of the
$ 30
world? I'll believe that when I see it! No, he won't get rid of me.
 Tomorrow he'll be talking to Fräulein Anna, about ordinary things at first, as is
natural, but suddenly he won't be able to keep it from her any longer: Last night,
Annie, after the party, you remember, I was with a man the like of whom you've
certainly never seen. He looked -- how can I describe him to you? -- like a stick
dangling in the air, he looked, with a black-haired skull on top. His body was clad in a
lot of small, dull-yellow patches of cloth which covered him completely because they
hung closely about him in the still air of last night. Well, Annie, does that spoil your
appetite? It does? In that case it's my fault, then I told the whole thing badly. If only
you'd seen him, walking timidly beside me, reading infatuation on my face (which
wasn't very difficult), and going a long way ahead of me so as not to disturb me. I
think, Annie, you'd have laughed a bit and been a bit afraid; but I was glad of his
company. For where were you, Annie? You were in your bed, and your bed was far
away -- it might just as well have been in Africa. But sometimes I really felt as though
the starry sky rose and fell with the gasping of his flat chest. You think I'm
exaggerating? No, Annie. Upon my soul, no. Upon my soul which belongs to you, no.
 And I didn't spare my acquaintance -- we had just reached the first steps of the
Franzensquai -- the smallest fraction of the humiliation he must have felt at making
such a speech. Save that my thoughts grew blurred at this moment, for the Moldau
and the quarter of the town on the farther shore lay together in the dark. A number of
lights burning there teased the eye.
 We crossed the road in order to reach the railing along the river, and there we
stood still. I found a tree to lean against. Because of the cold blowing up from the
water, I put on my gloves, sighed for no good reason, as one is inclined to do at night
beside a river, but then I wanted to walk on. My acquaintance, however, was staring
into the water, and didn't budge. Then he moved closer to the railing; his legs were
already against the iron bar, he propped his elbows up and laid his forehead in his
$ 31
hands. What next? After all, I was shivering and had to put up the collar of my coat.
My acquaintance stretched himself -- his back, shoulders, neck -- and held the upper
half of his body, which rested on his taut arms, bent over the railing.
 "Oh well, memories," said I. "Yes, even remembering in itself is sad, yet how
much more its object! Don't let yourself in for things like that, it's not for you and not
for me. It only weakens one's present position without strengthening the former one --
nothing is more obvious -- quite apart from the fact that the former one doesn't need
strengthening. Do you think I have no memories? Oh, ten for every one of yours. Now,
for instance, I could remember sitting on a bench in L. It was in the evening, also near
a river. In summer, of course. And on such evenings it's my habit to pull up my legs
and put my arms around them. I had leaned my head against the wooden back of the
bench, and from there I watched the cloudlike mountains on the other shore. A violin
was playing softly in the hotel by the river. Now and again on both shores trains
chuffed by amid shining smoke."
 Turning suddenly around, my acquaintance interrupted me; he almost looked
as though he were surprised to see me still here. "Oh, I could tell you much more," I
said, nothing else.
 "Just imagine," he began, "and it always happens like this. Today, as I was going
downstairs to take a short walk before the evening party, I couldn't help being
surprised by the way my hands were dangling about in my cuffs, and they were doing it
so gaily. Which promptly made me think: Just wait, something's going to happen
today. And it did, too." He said this while turning to go and looked at me smiling out
of his big eyes.
 So I had already got as far as that. He could tell me things like that and at the
same time smile and look at me with big eyes. And I -- I had to restrain myself from
putting my arm around his shoulders and kissing him on the eyes as a reward for
having absolutely no use for me. But the worst was that even that could no longer do
$ 32
any harm because it couldn't change anything, for now I had to go away, away at any
price.
 While I was still trying urgently to think of some means by which I could stay
at least a little while longer with my acquaintance, it occurred to me that perhaps my
long body displeased him by making him feel too small. And this thought -- although
it was late at night and we had hardly met a soul -- tormented me so much that while
walking I bent my back until my hands reached my knees. But in order to prevent my
acquaintance from noticing my intentions I changed my position only very gradually,
tried to divert his attention from myself, once even turning him toward the river,
pointing out to him with outstretched hands the trees on the Schutzeninsel and the
way the bridge lamps were reflected in the river.
 But wheeling suddenly around, he looked at me -- I hadn't quite finished yet --
and said: "What's this? You're all crooked! What on earth are you up to?"
 "Quite right. You're very observant," said I, my head on the seam of his
trousers, which was why I couldn't look up properly.
 "Enough of that! Stand up straight! What nonsense!"
 "No," I said, my face close to the ground, "I'll stay as I am."
 "You really can annoy a person, I must say. Such a waste of time! Come on, put
an end to it."
 "The way you shout! In the quiet of the night!" I said.
 "Oh well, just as you like," he added, and after a while: "It's a quarter to one." He
had evidently seen the time on the clock of the Mühlenturm.
$ 33
 I promptly stood up straight as though I'd been pulled up by the hair. For a
while I kept my mouth open, to let my agitation escape. I understood: he was sending
me away. There was no place for me near him, or if there were one, at least it could
not be found. Why, by the way, was I so intent on staying with him? No, I ought to go
away -- and this at once -- to my relatives and friends who were waiting for me. But if I
didn't have any relatives and friends then I must fend for myself (what was the good of
complaining!), but I must leave here no less quickly. For in his eyes nothing could
redeem me any longer, neither my length, my appetite, nor my cold hand. But if I were
of the opinion that I had to remain with him, it was a dangerous opinion.
 "I wasn't in need of your information," I said, which happened to be true.
 "Thank God you're standing up straight again. All I said was that it's a quarter
to one."
 "That's all right," said I, and stuck two fingernails in the gaps between my
chattering teeth. "If I didn't need your information, how much less do I need an
explanation. The fact is, I need nothing but your mercy. Please, take back what you
said just now!"
 "That it's a quarter to one? But with pleasure, especially since a quarter to one
passed long ago."
 He lifted his right arm, flicked his hand, and listened to the castanetlike sound
of his cuff links.
 Obviously, this is the time for the murder. I'll stay with him and slowly he'll
draw the dagger -- the handle of which he is already holding in his pocket -- along his
coat, and then plunge it into me. It's unlikely that he'll be surprised at the simplicity of
it all -- yet maybe he will, who knows? I won't scream, I'll just stare at him as long as
my eyes can stand it.
$ 34
 "Well?" he said.
 In front of a distant coffeehouse with black windowpanes a policeman let
himself glide over the pavement like a skater. His sword hampering him, he took it in
his hand, and now he glided along for quite a while, finally ending up by almost
describing a circle. At last he yodeled weakly and, melodies in his head, began once
more to skate.
 It wasn't until the arrival of this policeman -- who, two hundred feet from an
imminent murder, saw and heard only himself -- that I began to feel a certain fear. I
realized that whether I allowed myself to be stabbed or ran away, my end had come.
Would it not be better, then, to run away and thus expose myself to a difficult and
therefore more painful death? I could not immediately put my finger on the reasons in
favor of this form of death, but I couldn't afford to spend my last remaining seconds
looking for reasons. There would be time for that later provided I had the
determination, and the determination I had.
 I had to run away, it would be quite easy. At the turning to the left onto the
Karlsbrücke I could jump to the right into the Karlsgasse. It was winding, there were
dark doorways, and taverns still open; I didn't need to despair.
 As we stepped from under the arch at the end of the quay onto the
Kreuzherrenplatz, I ran into that street with my arms raised. But in front of a small
door in the Seminarkirche I fell, for there was a step which I had not expected. It made
a little noise, the next street lamp was sufficiently far away, I lay in the dark.
 From a tavern opposite came a fat woman with a lantern to see what had
happened in the street. The piano within continued playing, but fainter, with only one
hand, because the pianist had turned toward the door which, until now ajar, had been
opened wide by a man in a high-buttoned coat. He spat and then hugged the woman
so hard she was obliged to raise the lantern in order to protect it.
$ 35
 "Nothing's happened!" he shouted into the room, whereupon they both turned,
went inside, and the door was closed.
 When I tried to get up I fell down again. "Sheer ice," I said, and felt a pain in my
knee. Yet I was glad that the people in the tavern hadn't seen me and that I could go
on lying here peacefully until dawn.
 My acquaintance had apparently walked on as far as the bridge without having
noticed my disappearance, for it was some time before he joined me. I saw no signs of
surprise as he bent down over me -- lowering little more than his neck, exactly like a
hyena -- and stroked me with a soft hand. He passed it up and down my cheekbone
and then laid his palm on my forehead. "You've hurt yourself, eh? Well, it's icy and one
must be careful -- didn't you tell me so yourself? Does your head ache? No? Oh, the
knee. H'm. That's bad."
 But it didn't occur to him to help me up. I supported my head with my right
hand, my elbow on a cobblestone, and said: "Here we are together again." And as my
fear was beginning to return, I pressed both hands against his shinbone in order to
push him away. "Do go away," I said.
 He had his hands in his pockets and looked up the empty street, then at the
Seminarkirche, then up at the sky. At last, at the sound of a carriage in one of the
nearby streets, he remembered me: "Why don't you say something, my friend? Do you
feel sick? Why don't you get up? Shall I look for a cab? If you like, I'll get you some
wine from the tavern. In any case, you mustn't lie here in the cold. Besides, we wanted
to go up the Laurenziberg."
 "Of course," said I, and got up on my own, but with great pain. I began to sway,
and had to look severely at the statue of Karl IV to be sure of my position. However,
even this would not have helped me had I not remembered that I was loved by a girl
with a black velvet ribbon around her neck, if not passionately, at least faithfully. And
$ 36
it really was kind of the moon to shine on me, too, and out of modesty I was about to
place myself under the arch of the tower bridge when it occurred to me that the moon,
of course, shone on everything. So I happily spread out my arms in order fully to enjoy
the moon. And by making swimming movements with my weary arms it was easy for
me to advance without pain or difficulty. To think that I had never tried this before!
My head lay in the cool air and it was my right knee that flew best; I praised it by
patting it. And I remembered that once upon a time I didn't altogether like an
acquaintance, who was probably still walking below me, and the only thing that
pleased me about the whole business was that my memory was good enough to
remember even a thing like that. But I couldn't afford to do much thinking, for I had to
go on swimming to prevent myself from sinking too low. However, to avoid being told
later that anyone could swim on the pavement and that it wasn't worth mentioning, I
raised myself above the railing by increasing my speed and swam in circles around the
statue of every saint I encountered. At the fifth -- I was holding myself just above the
footpath by imperceptible flappings -- my acquaintance gripped my hand. There I
stood once more on the pavement and felt a pain in my knee.
 "I've always admired," said my acquaintance, clutching me with one hand and
pointing with the other at the statue of St. Ludmila, "I've always admired the hands of
this angel here to the left. Just see how delicate they are! Real angel's hands! Have you
ever seen anything like them? You haven't, but I have, for this evening I kissed hands --
"
 But for me there was now a third possibility of perishing. I didn't have to let
myself be stabbed, I didn't have to run away, I could simply throw myself into the air.
Let him go up his Laurenziberg, I won't interfere with him, not even by running away
will I interfere with him.
 And now I shouted: "Out with your stories! I no longer want to hear scraps.
Tell me everything, from beginning to end. I won't listen to less, I warn you. But I'm
$ 37
burning to hear the whole thing." When he looked at me I stopped shouting so loud.
"And you can count on my discretion! Tell me everything that's on your mind. You've
never had so discreet a listener as I."
 And rather low, close to his ear, I said: "And you don't need to be afraid of me,
that's quite unnecessary."
 I heard him laugh.
 "Yes, yes," I said. "I believe that. I don't doubt it," and so saying I pinched him in
the calves -- where they were exposed. But he didn't feel it. Whereupon I said to
myself: "Why walk with this man? You don't love him, nor do you hate him, because
all he cares about is a girl and it's not even certain that she wears a white dress. So to
you this man is indifferent -- I repeat: indifferent. But he is also harmless, as has been
proved. So walk on with him up the Laurenziberg, for you are already on your way, it's
a beautiful night, but let him do the talking and enjoy yourself after your fashion, for
this is the very best way (say it in a whisper) to protect yourself."
II
DIVERSIONS or PROOF THAT
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO LIVE
i A RIDE
$ 38
 And now -- with a flourish, as though it were not the first time -- I leapt onto
the shoulders of my acquaintance, and by digging my fists into his back I urged him
into a trot. But since he stumped forward rather reluctantly and sometimes even
stopped, I kicked him in the belly several times with my boots, to make him more
lively. It worked and we came fast enough into the interior of a vast but as yet
unfinished landscape.
 The road on which I was riding was stony and rose considerably, but just this I
liked and I let it become still stonier and steeper. As soon as my acquaintance
stumbled I pulled him up by the collar and the moment he sighed I boxed his head. In
doing so I felt how healthy this ride in the good air was for me, and in order to make
him wilder I let a strong wind blow against us in long gusts.
 Now I even began to exaggerate my jumping movements on my acquaintance's
broad shoulders, and gripping his neck tight with both hands I bent my head far back
and contemplated the many and various clouds which, weaker than I, sailed clumsily
with the wind. I laughed and trembled with courage. My coat spread out and gave me
strength. I pressed my hands hard together and in doing so happened to make my
acquaintance choke. Only when the sky became gradually hidden by the branches of
the trees, which I let grow along the road, did I come to myself.
 "I don't know," I cried without a sound, "I really don't know. If nobody comes,
then nobody comes. I have done nobody any harm, nobody has done me any harm,
but nobody will help me. A pack of nobodies. But it isn't quite like that. It's just that
nobody helps me, otherwise a pack of nobodies would be nice, I would rather like
(what do you think?) to go on an excursion with a pack of nobodies. Into the
mountains, of course, where else? Just look at these nobodies pushing each other, all
these arms stretched across or hooked into one another, these feet separated by tiny
steps! Everyone in frock coats, needless to say. We walk along so happily, a fine wind is
whistling through the gaps made by us and our limbs. In the mountains our throats
$ 39
become free. It's a wonder we don't break into song."
 Then my acquaintance collapsed, and when I examined him I discovered that
he was badly wounded in the knee. Since he could no longer be of any use to me, I left
him there on the stones without much regret and whistled down a few vultures which,
obediently and with serious beaks, settled down on him in order to guard him.
ii A WALK
 I walked on, unperturbed. But since, as a pedestrian, I dreaded the effort of
climbing the mountainous road, I let it become gradually flatter, let it slope down into
a valley in the distance. The stones vanished at my will and the wind disappeared.
 I walked at a brisk pace and since I was on my way down I raised my head,
stiffened my body, and crossed my arms behind my head. Because I love pinewoods I
went through woods of this kind, and since I like gazing silently up at the stars, the
stars appeared slowly in the sky, as is their wont. I saw only a few fleecy clouds which a
wind, blowing just at their height, pulled through the air, to the astonishment of the
pedestrian.
 Opposite and at some distance from my road, probably separated from it by a
river as well, I caused to rise an enormously high mountain whose plateau, overgrown
with brushwood, bordered on the sky. I could see quite clearly the little ramifications
of the highest branches and their movements. This sight, ordinary as it may be, made
me so happy that I, as a small bird on a twig of those distant scrubby bushes, forgot to
let the moon come up. It lay already behind the mountain, no doubt angry at the delay.
$ 40
 But now the cool light that precedes the rising of the moon spread over the
mountain and suddenly the moon itself appeared from beyond one of the restless
bushes. I on the other hand had meanwhile been gazing in another direction, and
when I now looked ahead of me and suddenly saw it glowing in its almost full
roundness, I stood still with troubled eyes, for my precipitous road seemed to lead
straight into this terrifying moon.
 After a while, however, I grew accustomed to it and watched with composure
the difficulty it had in rising, until finally, having approached one another a
considerable part of the way, I felt overcome by an intense drowsiness caused, I
assumed, by the fatigue of the walk, to which I was unaccustomed. I wandered on for a
while with closed eyes, keeping myself awake only by a loud and regular clapping of
my hands.
 But then, as the road threatened to slip away from under my feet and
everything, as weary as I myself, began to vanish, I summoned my remaining strength
and hastened to scale the slope to the right of the road in order to reach in time the
high tangled pinewood where I planned to spend the night that probably lay ahead of
us.
 The haste was necessary. The stars were already fading and I noticed the moon
sink feebly into the sky as though into troubled waters. The mountain already
belonged to the darkness, the road crumbled away at the point where I had turned
toward the slope, and from the interior of the forest I heard the approaching crashes
of collapsing trees. Now I could have thrown myself down on the moss to sleep, but
since I feared to sleep on the ground I crept -- the trunk sliding quickly down the rings
formed by my arms and legs -- up a tree which was already reeling without wind. I lay
down on a branch and, leaning my head against the trunk, went hastily to sleep while a
squirrel of my whim sat stiff-tailed at the trembling end of the branch, and rocked
itself.
$ 41
 My sleep was deep and dreamless. Neither the waning moon nor the rising sun
awoke me. And even when I was about to wake up, I calmed myself by saying: "You
made a great effort yesterday, so spare your sleep," and went to sleep again.
 Although I did not dream, my sleep was not free from a continuous slight
disturbance. All night long I heard someone talking beside me. The words themselves
I could hardly hear -- except isolated ones like "bench. . . by the river," "cloudlike
mountains," "trains. . . amidst shining smoke"; what I did hear was the special kind of
emphasis placed on them; and I remember that even in my sleep I rubbed my hands
with pleasure at not being obliged to recognize single words, since I was asleep.
 "Your life was monotonous," I said aloud in order to convince myself, "it really
was necessary for you to be taken somewhere else. You ought to be content, it's gay
here. The sun's shining."
 Whereupon the sun shone and the rain clouds grew white and light and small
in the blue sky. They sparkled and billowed out. I saw a river in the valley.
 "Yes, your life was monotonous, you deserve this diversion," I continued as
though compelled, "but was it not also perilous?" At that moment I heard someone
sigh terribly near.
 I tried to climb down quickly, but since the branch trembled as much as my
hand I fell rigid from the top. I did not fall heavily, nor did I feel any pain, but I felt so
weak and unhappy that I buried my face in the ground: I could not bear the strain of
seeing around me the things of the earth. I felt convinced that every movement and
every thought was forced, and that one had to be on one's guard against them. Yet
nothing seemed more natural than to lie here on the grass, my arms beside my body,
my face hidden. And I tried to persuade myself that I ought to be pleased to be already
in this natural position, for otherwise many painful contortions, such as steps or
words, would be required to arrive at it.
$ 42
 The river was wide and its noisy little waves reflected the light. On the other
shore lay meadows which farther on merged into bushes behind which, at a great
distance, one could see bright avenues of fruit trees leading to green hills.
 Pleased by this sight, I lay down and, stopping my ears against the dread sound
of sobs, I thought: Here I could be content. For here it is secluded and beautiful. It
won't take much courage to live here. One will have to struggle here as anywhere else,
but at least one won't have to do it with graceful movements. That won't be necessary.
For there are only mountains and a wide river and I have sense enough to regard them
as inanimate. Yes, when I totter alone up the steep path through the meadows in the
evening I will be no more forsaken than the mountains, except that I will feel it. But I
think that this, too, will pass.
 Thus I toyed with my future life and tried stubbornly to forget. And all the time
I blinked at that sky which was of an unusually promising color. It was a long time
since I'd seen it like this; I was moved and reminded of certain days when I thought I
had seen it in the same way. I took my hands from my ears, spread out my arms, and
let them fall in the grass.
 I heard someone sob softly from afar. A wind sprang up and a great mass of
leaves, which I had not seen before, rose rustling into the air. Unripe fruit thudded
senselessly from the trees onto the ground. Ugly clouds rose from behind the
mountain. The waves on the river creaked and receded from the wind.
 I got up quickly. My heart hurt, for now it seemed impossible to escape from
my suffering. I was already about to turn and leave this region and go back to my
former way of life when the following idea occurred to me: "How strange it is that even
in our time distinguished people are transported across a river in this complicated
way. There's no other explanation than that it is an old custom." I shook my head, for I
was surprised.
$ 43
iii THE FAT MAN
a An Address to the Landscape
 From the thicket on the opposite bank four naked men strode vehemently
forth, carrying on their shoulders a wooden litter. On this litter sat, Oriental fashion, a
monstrously fat man. Although carried through the thicket on an untrodden path, he
did not push the thorny branches apart but simply let his motionless body thrust
through them. His folds of fat were so carefully spread out that although they covered
the whole litter and even hung down its side like the hem of a yellowish carpet, they
did not hamper him. His hairless skull was small and gleamed yellow. His face bore the
artless expression of a man who meditates and makes no effort to conceal it. From
time to time he closed his eyes: on opening them again his chin became distorted.
 "The landscape disturbs my thought," he said in a low voice. "It makes my
reflections sway like suspension bridges in a furious current. It is beautiful and for this
reason wants to be looked at."
 I close my eyes and say: You green mountain by the river, with your rocks
rolling against the water, you are beautiful.
 But it is not satisfied; it wants me to open my eyes to it.
 Then I might say to it with my eyes closed: "Mountain, I do not love you, for
you remind me of the clouds, of the sunset, of the rising sky, and these are things that
almost make me cry because one can never reach them while being carried on a small
litter. But when showing me this, sly mountain, you block the distant view which
$ 44
gladdens me, for it reveals the attainable at a glance. That's why I do not love you,
mountain by the water -- no, I do not love you."
 But the mountain would be as indifferent to this speech as to my former one so
long as I did not talk with my eyes open. This is the only way to please it.
 And must we not keep it well disposed toward us in order to keep it up at all --
this mountain which has such a capricious fondness for the pulp of our brains? It
might cast on me its jagged shadow, it might silently thrust terrible bare walls in front
of me and my bearers would stumble over the little pebbles on the road.
 But it is not only the mountain that is so vain, so obtrusive and vindictive --
everything else is, too. So I must go on repeating with wide-open eyes -- oh, how they
hurt!:
 "Yes, mountain, you are beautiful and the forests on your western slope delight
me. -- With you, flower, I am also pleased, and your pink gladdens my soul. -- You,
grass of the meadows, are already high and strong and refreshing. -- And you, exotic
bushes, you prick so unexpectedly that our thoughts start leaping. -- But with you,
river, I am so delighted that I will let myself be carried through your supple water."
 After he had shouted this paean of praise ten times, accompanied by some
humble shifting of his body, he let his head droop and said with closed eyes:
 "But now -- I implore you -- mountain, flowers, grass, bush, and river, give me
some room so that I may breathe."
 At that moment the surrounding mountains began to shift in hasty obedience,
then withdrew behind a curtain of fog. Although the avenues stood firm for a while
and guarded the width of the road, they soon merged into one another. In the sky in
front of the sun lay a humid cloud with a delicately transparent edge in whose shade
$ 45
the country sank deeper and deeper while everything else lost its lovely outline.
 The sound of the bearers' steps reached my side of the river and yet I could not
distinguish any details in the dark square of their faces. I only saw them bending their
heads sideways and arching their backs, for their burden was excessive. I was worried
about them, for I realized that they were tired. So it was in suspense that I watched
them step into the rushes, then walk through the wet sand, their strides still regular,
until they finally sank into the muddy swamp where the two rear bearers bent even
lower so as to keep the litter in its horizontal position. I pressed my hands together. By
now they had to raise their feet high at every step until their bodies glistened with
sweat in the cool air of this unsettled afternoon.
 The fat man sat quiet, hands on his thighs; the long pointed tips of the reeds
grazed him as they flipped up in the wake of the bearers in front.
 The bearers' movements grew more irregular the nearer they came to the
water. At times the litter swayed as though it were already on the waves. Small puddles
in the rushes had to be jumped over or walked around, for they might possibly be
deep.
 At one moment wild ducks rose shrieking, mounting steeply into the rain
cloud. It was then that I caught a glimpse of the fat man's face; it looked alarmed. I got
up and in hectic leaps I zigzagged over the stony slope separating me from the water. I
paid no heed to the danger, was concerned only with helping the fat man should his
servants no longer be able to carry him. I ran so recklessly that I couldn't stop, and was
forced to dash into the splashing water, coming to a halt only when the water reached
my knees.
 Meanwhile the servants, with considerable distortions of their bodies, had
carried the litter into the river, and holding themselves above the unruly water with
one hand, they propped up the litter with four hairy arms, their muscles standing out
$ 46
in relief.
 The water lapped against their chins, then rose to their mouths; the bearers
bent their heads back and the litter handles fell on their shoulders. The water was
already playing around the bridges of their noses, and yet they did not give up,
although they had hardly reached the middle of the river. Then a low wave swept over
the heads of those in front and the four men drowned in silence, their desperate hands
pulling the litter down with them. Water gushed after them.
 And now the evening sun's slanting rays broke forth from behind the rims of
the great cloud and illuminated the hills and mountains as far as the eye could see,
while the river and the region beneath the cloud lay in an uncertain light.
 The fat man turned slowly in the direction of the flowing water and was carried
down the river like a yellow wooden idol which had become useless and so had been
cast into the river. He sailed along on the reflection of the rain cloud. Elongated clouds
pulled and small hunched ones pushed him, creating considerable commotion, the
effect of which could even be noticed by the lapping of water against my knees and the
stones on the shore.
 I crept quickly up the slope so as to be able to accompany the fat man on his
way, for I truly loved him. And perhaps I could learn something about the dangers of
this apparently safe country. So I walked along a strip of sand to the narrowness of
which one had to grow accustomed, hands in my pockets and my face turned at right
angles to the river so that my chin rested almost on my shoulder.
 Swallows sat on the stones by the shore.
 The fat man said: "Dear sir on the shore, don't try to rescue me. This is the
water's and the wind's revenge; now I am lost. Yes, revenge it is, for how often have we
attacked them, I and my friend the supplicant, amidst the singing of our swords, the
$ 47
flash of cymbals, the great splendor of trumpets, and the leaping blaze of drums!"
 A tiny mosquito with stretched wings flew straight through his belly without
losing its speed. The fat man continued:
b Beginning of a Conversation with the Supplicant
 There was a time when I went to a church day after day, for a girl I was in love
with used to kneel there in prayer for half an hour every evening, which enabled me to
watch her at my leisure.
 Once when the girl failed to appear and in dismay I was watching the other
people praying, my eye was caught by a young man who had flung his long emaciated
figure on the ground. From time to time he clutched his skull with all his strength and,
moaning loudly, beat it in the palms of his hands on the stone floor.
 In the church there were only a few old women who kept turning their shawled
heads sideways to glance at the praying man. This attention seemed to please him, for
before each of his pious outbursts he let his eyes rove about to see how many people
were watching him. Finding this unseemly, I decided to accost him on his way out of
the church and ask him outright why he prayed in this manner. For since my arrival in
this town clarity had become more important to me than anything else, even though at
this moment I felt only annoyance at my girl's failure to appear.
 Yet an hour passed before he stood up, brushed his trousers for such a long
time that I felt like shouting: "Enough, enough! We can all see that you have trousers
on," crossed himself carefully, and with the lumbering gait of a sailor walked to the
font of holy water.
$ 48
 I placed myself between the font and the door, determined not to let him pass
without an explanation. I screwed up my mouth, this being the best preparation for
resolute speech, and supported myself by standing on my right leg while resting the
left one on its toes, for this position as I have often experienced gives me a sense of
stability.
 Now it is possible that this young man had already caught sight of me while
sprinkling his face with holy water; perhaps my stare had alarmed him even earlier, for
he now quite unexpectedly rushed to the door and out. I involuntarily jumped to stop
him. The glass door slammed. And when I passed through it a moment later I could
not find him, for the narrow streets were numerous and the traffic considerable.
 During the following days he failed to appear, but the girl came and again
prayed in a corner of a side chapel. She wore a black dress with a transparent lace yoke
-- the crescent of her chemise could be seen through it -- from the lower edge of
which the silk hung down in a finely cut frill. And now that the girl had returned I was
glad to forget about the young man, ignoring him even when he continued to appear
regularly and to pray in his usual fashion.
 Yet he always passed me by in sudden haste, his face averted. While praying, on
the other hand, he kept glancing at me. It almost looked as though he were angry with
me for not having accosted him earlier and was thinking that for my first attempt to
talk to him I had actually taken upon me the duty to do so. One day as I was following
the girl out as usual after a service, I ran into him in the semidarkness and thought I
saw him smile.
 The duty to talk to him, needless to say, did not exist, nor had I much desire to
do so anymore. And even when I hurried up to the church one evening while the clock
was striking seven and found, instead of the girl who of course had left long ago, only
the young man exerting himself in front of the altar railings, I still hesitated.
$ 49
 At last I tiptoed to the door, slipped a coin to the blind beggar sitting there, and
squeezed in beside him behind the open wing. And there for about half an hour I
looked forward to the surprise I was planning to spring upon the supplicant. But this
feeling did not last. Before long I was morosely watching spiders creeping over my
clothes and finding it tiresome to have to bend forward every time someone came
breathing loud out of the darkness of the church.
 But finally he came. The ringing of the great bells which had started a little
while ago did not agree with him, I realized. Each time before taking a step he had to
touch the ground lightly with his foot.
 I straightened myself, took a long stride forward, and grabbed him. "Good
evening," said I, and with my hand on his coat collar I pushed him down the steps onto
the lighted square.
 When we had reached ground level he turned toward me while I was still
holding on to him from behind, so that we stood breast to breast.
 "If only you'd let go of me!" he said. "I don't know what you suspect me of, but
I'm innocent." Then he repeated once more: "Of course I don't know what you suspect
me of."
 "There is no question here of suspicion or innocence. I ask you not to mention
it again. We are strangers; our acquaintance is no older than the church steps are high.
What would happen if we were immediately to start discussing our innocence?"
 "Precisely what I think," he said. "As a matter of fact, you said 'our innocence.'
Do you mean to suggest that if I had proved my innocence you would have to prove
yours, too? Is that what you mean?"
 "That or something else," I said. "I accosted you only because I wanted to ask
$ 50
you something, remember that!"
 "I'd like to go home," he said, and made an effort to turn.
 "I quite believe it. Would I have accosted you otherwise? Don't get the idea that
I accosted you on account of your beautiful eyes."
 "Aren't you being a little too sincere?"
 "Must I repeat that there's no question of such things? What has it to do with
sincerity or insincerity? I ask, you answer, and then goodbye. So far as I'm concerned
you can even go home, and as fast as you like."
 "Would it not be better to meet some other time? At a more suitable hour? Say
in a coffeehouse? Besides, your fiancée left only a few minutes ago, you can easily catch
her up, she has waited so long for you."
 "No!" I shouted into the noise of the passing tram. "You won't escape me. I like
you more and more. You're a lucky catch. I congratulate myself."
 To which he said: "Oh God, you have a sound heart, as they say, but a head of
wood. You call me a lucky catch, how lucky you must be! For my bad luck is
precariously balanced and when touched it falls onto the questioner. And so: Good
night."
 "Fine," said I, surprised him and seized his right hand. "If you don't answer of
your own accord, I'll force you. I'll follow you wherever you go, right or left, even up
the stairs to your room, and in your room I'll sit down, wherever there's space. Go on
then, keep staring at me, I can stand it. But how" -- I stepped up close and because he
was a head taller I spoke into his throat -- "how are you going to summon up the
courage to stop me?"
$ 51
 Whereupon, stepping back, he kissed my hands in turn, and wetted them with
his tears. "One cannot deny you anything. Just as you knew I want to go home, I knew
even earlier that I cannot deny you anything. All I ask is that we go over there into the
side street." I nodded and we went over. When a carriage separated us and I was left
behind, he beckoned to me with both hands, to make me hurry.
 But once there, not satisfied with the darkness of the street where the lamps
were widely separated from one another and almost as high as the first floor, he led me
into the low hallway of an old house and under a small lamp which hung dripping in
front of the wooden stairs.
 Spreading his handkerchief over the hollow in a worn step, he invited me to be
seated: "It's easier for you to ask questions sitting down. I'll remain standing, it's easier
for me to answer. But don't torment me!"
 I sat down because he took it all so seriously, but nevertheless felt I had to say:
"You've led me to this hole as though we are conspirators, whereas I am bound to you
simply by curiosity, you to me by fear. Actually, all I want to ask is why you pray like
that in church. The way you carry on there! Like an utter fool! How ridiculous it all is,
how unpleasant for the onlookers, how intolerable for the devout!"
 He had pressed his body against the wall, only his head moved slowly in space.
"You're wrong! The devout consider my behavior natural, the others consider it
devout."
 "My annoyance proves you're mistaken."
 "Your annoyance -- assuming it's real -- only proves that you belong neither to
the devout nor to the others."
 "You're right. I was exaggerating when I said your behavior annoyed me; no, it
$ 52
aroused my curiosity as I stated correctly at first. But you, to which group do you
belong?"
 "Oh, I just get fun out of people watching me, out of occasionally casting a
shadow on the altar, so to speak."
 "Fun?" I asked, making a face.
 "No, if you want to know. Don't be angry with me for expressing it wrongly. It's
not fun, for me it's a need; a need to let myself be nailed down for a brief hour by those
eyes, while the whole town around me --"
 "The things you say!" I cried far too loud for the insignificant remark and the
low hallway, but I was afraid of falling silent or of lowering my voice. "Really, the
things you say! Now I realize, by God, that I guessed from the very beginning the state
you are in. Isn't it something like a fever, a seasickness on land, a kind of leprosy?
Don't you feel it's this very feverishness that is preventing you from being properly
satisfied with the real names of things, and that now, in your frantic haste, you're just
pelting them with any old names? You can't do it fast enough. But hardly have you run
away from them when you've forgotten the names you gave them. The poplar in the
fields, which you've called the 'Tower of Babel' because you didn't want to know it was
a poplar, sways again without a name, so you have to call it 'Noah in his cups.' "
 He interrupted me: "I'm glad I haven't understood a word you've been saying."
 Irritated, I said quickly: "Your being glad about it proves that you have
understood it."
 "Didn't I say so before? One cannot deny you anything."
 I put my hands on a step above me, leaned back, and in this all but unassailable
$ 53
position, the wrestler's last resort, I asked: "Excuse me, but to throw back at me an
explanation which I gave you is insincere."
 At this he grew daring. To give his body unity he clasped his hands together
and said with some reluctance: "You ruled out quarrels about insincerity from the very
beginning. And truly, I'm no longer concerned with anything but to give you a proper
explanation for my way of praying. Do you know why I pray like that?"
 He was putting me to the test. No, I didn't know, nor did I want to know. I
hadn't even wanted to come here, I said to myself, but this creature had practically
forced me to listen to him. So all I had to do was to shake my head and everything
would be all right, but at the moment this was just what I couldn't do. The creature
opposite me smiled. Then he crouched down on his knees and said with a sleepy
expression: "Now I can also tell you at last why I let you accost me. Out of curiosity,
from hope. Your stare has been comforting me for a long time. And I hope to learn
from you how things really are, why it is that around me things sink away like fallen
snow, whereas for other people even a little liqueur glass stands on the table steady as
a statue."
 As I remained silent and only an involuntary twitching passed over my face, he
asked: "So you don't believe this happens to other people? You really don't? Just listen,
then. When as a child I opened my eyes after a brief afternoon nap, still not quite sure
I was alive, I heard my mother up on the balcony asking in a natural tone of voice:
'What are you doing, my dear? Goodness, isn't it hot?' From the garden a woman
answered: 'Me, I'm having my tea on the lawn.' They spoke casually and not very
distinctly, as though this woman had expected the question, my mother the answer."
 Feeling that this required an answer, I put my hand in the hip pocket of my
trousers as though I were looking for something. Actually, I wasn't looking for
anything, I just wished to change my appearance in order to show interest in the
conversation. Finally I said I thought this a most remarkable incident and that I
$ 54
couldn't make head or tail of it. I also added that I didn't believe it was true and that it
must have been invented for a special reason whose purpose wasn't clear to me just
now. Then I closed my eyes so as to shut out the bad light.
 "Well, isn't that encouraging! For once you agree with me, and you accosted me
to tell me that out of sheer unselfishness. I lose one hope and acquire another.
 "Why, after all, should I feel ashamed of not walking upright and taking normal
steps, of not tapping the pavement with my stick, and not touching the clothes of the
people who pass noisily by? Am I not rather entitled to complain bitterly at having to
skip along the houses like a shadow without a clear outline, sometimes disappearing in
the panes of the shopwindows?
 "Oh, what dreadful days I have to live through! Why is everything so badly built
that high houses collapse every now and again for no apparent reason? On these
occasions I clamber over the rubble, asking everyone I meet: 'How could this have
happened? In our town -- a new house -- how many does that make today? -- Just
think of it!' And no one can give me an answer.
 "Frequently people fall in the street and lie there dead. Whereupon all the shop
people open their doors laden with wares, hurry busily out, cart the dead into a house,
come out again all smiles, then the chatter begins: 'Good morning -- it's a dull day --
I'm selling any amount of kerchiefs -- ah yes, the war.' I rush into the house, and after
raising my hand several times timidly with my finger crooked, I finally knock on the
janitor's little window: 'Good morning,' I say, 'I understand a dead man was carried in
here just now. Would you be kind enough to let me see him?' And when he shakes his
head as though unable to make up his mind, I add: 'Take care, I'm a member of the
secret police and insist on seeing the dead man at once!' Now he is no longer
undecided. 'Out with you!' he shouts. 'This riffraff is getting in the habit of snooping
about here every day. There's no dead man here. Maybe next door.' I raise my hat and
go.
$ 55
 "But then, on having to cross a large square, I forget everything. If people must
build such huge squares from sheer wantonness, why don't they build a balustrade
across them as well? Today there's a southwest wind blowing. The spire of the Town
Hall is moving in little circles. All the windowpanes are rattling, and the lampposts are
bending like bamboos. The Virgin Mary's cloak is coiling around her pillar and the
wind is tugging at it. Does no one notice this? The ladies and gentlemen who should
be walking on the pavement are floating. When the wind falls they stand still, say a few
words, and bow to one another, but when the wind rises again they are helpless, and
all their feet leave the ground at the same time. Although obliged to hold on to their
hats, their eyes twinkle gaily enough and no one has the slightest fault to find with the
weather. I'm the only one who's afraid."
 To which I was able to say: "That story you told me earlier about your mother
and the woman in the garden I really don't find so remarkable. Not only have I heard
and experienced many stories of this kind, I have even taken part in some. The whole
thing is perfectly natural. Do you really mean to suggest that had I been on that
balcony in the summer, I could not have asked the same question and given the same
answer from the garden? Quite an ordinary occurrence!"
 After I had said this, he seemed relieved at last. He told me I was well dressed
and that he very much liked my tie. And what a fine complexion I had. And that
confessions became most comprehensible when they were retracted.
c The Supplicant's Story
 Then he sat down beside me, for I had grown timid and, bending my head to
one side, had made room for him. Nevertheless, it didn't escape my notice that he too
was sitting there rather embarrassed, trying to keep some distance from me and
speaking with difficulty:
$ 56
 "Oh, what dreadful days I have to live through! Last night I was at a party. I was
just bowing to a young lady in the gaslight and saying: 'I'm so glad winter's
approaching' -- I was just bowing with these words when to my annoyance I noticed
that my right thigh had slipped out of joint. The kneecap had also become a little
loose.
 "So I sat down, and as I always try to keep control over my sentences, I said: 'for
winter's much less of an effort; it's easier to comport oneself, one doesn't have to take
so much trouble with one's words. Don't you agree, Fräulein? I do hope I'm right about
this.' My right leg was now giving me a lot of trouble. At first it seemed to have fallen
apart completely, and only gradually did I manage to get it more or less back into
shape by manipulation and careful rearrangement.
 "Then I heard the girl, who, out of sympathy, had also sat down, say in a low
voice: 'No, you don't impress me at all because --'
 " 'Just a moment,' I said, pleased and full of expectation, 'you mustn't waste so
much as five minutes talking to me, dear Fräulein. Please eat something while you're
talking, I implore you.'
 "And stretching out my arm I took a large bunch of grapes hanging heavily
from a bowl held up by a bronze winged cupid, dangled it for a moment in the air, and
then laid it on a small blue plate which I handed to the girl, not without a certain
elegance, I trust.
 " 'You don't impress me at all,' she said, 'Everything you say is boring and
incomprehensible, but that alone doesn't make it true. What I really think, sir -- why
do you always call me dear Fräulein? -- is that you can't be bothered with the truth
simply because it's too tiring.'
 "God, how good that made me feel! 'Yes, Fräulein, Fräulein!' I almost shouted,
$ 57
'how right you are! Dear Fräulein, if you only knew what a wild joy it is to find oneself
so well understood -- and without having made any effort!'
 " 'There's no doubt, sir, that for you the truth is too tiring. Just look at yourself!
The entire length of you is cut out of tissue paper, yellow tissue paper, like a silhouette,
and when you walk one ought to hear you rustle. So one shouldn't get annoyed at your
attitude or opinion, for you can't help bending to whatever draft happens to be in the
room.'
 "'I don't understand that. True, several people are standing about here in this
room. They lay their arms on the backs of chairs or they lean against the piano or they
raise a glass tentatively to their mouths or they walk timidly into the next room, and
having knocked their right shoulders against a cupboard in the dark, they stand
breathing by the open window and think: There's Venus, the evening star. Yet here I
am, among them. If there is a connection, I don't understand it. But I don't even know
if there is a connection. -- And you see, dear Fräulein, of all these people who behave
so irresolutely, so absurdly as a result of their confusion, I alone seem worthy of
hearing the truth about myself. And to make this truth more palatable you put it in a
mocking way so that something concrete remains, like the outer walls of a house
whose interior has been gutted. The eye is hardly obstructed; by day the clouds and
sky can be seen through the great window holes, and by night the stars. But the clouds
are often hewn out of gray stones, and the stars form unnatural constellations. -- How
would it be if in return I were to tell you that one day everyone wanting to live will
look like me -- cut out of tissue paper, like silhouettes, as you pointed out -- and when
they walk they will be heard to rustle? Not that they will be any different from what
they are now, but that is what they will look like. Even you, dear Fräulein --'
 "Then I noticed that the girl was no longer sitting beside me. She must have left
soon after her last words, for now she was standing far away from me by a window,
surrounded by three young men who were talking and laughing out of high white
$ 58
collars.
 "So I happily drank a glass of wine and walked over to the pianist who, all alone
and nodding to himself, happened to be playing something sad. I bent carefully down
to his ear so as not to frighten him and whispered into the melody: 'Be so kind, sir, as
to let me play now, for I'm just beginning to feel happy.'
 "Since he paid no attention to me, I stood there for a while embarrassed, but
then, overcoming my timidity, I went from one guest to another, saying casually:
'Today I'm going to play the piano. Yes.'
 "Everyone seemed to know I couldn't play, but they smiled in a friendly way,
pleased by the welcome interruption of their conversation. They paid proper attention
to me only when I said to the pianist in a very loud voice: 'Do me the favor, sir, of
letting me play now. After all, I'm just beginning to feel happy. A triumph is at stake.'
 "Although the pianist stopped, he neither left his brown bench nor appeared to
understand me. He sighed and covered his face with his long fingers.
 "I felt a trifle sorry for him and was about to encourage him to continue playing
when the hostess approached with a group of people.
 " 'That's a funny coincidence,' they said and laughed aloud as though I were
about to do something unnatural.
 "The girl also joined them, looked at me contemptuously, and said: 'Please,
madame, do let him play. Perhaps he wants to make some contribution to the
entertainment. He ought to be encouraged. Please let him.'
 "Everyone laughed, obviously thinking, as I did, that it was meant ironically.
Only the pianist was silent. Holding his head low, he stroked the wood of the bench
$ 59
with the forefinger of his left hand, as though he were making designs in sand. I began
to tremble, and to hide it, thrust my hands into my trouser pockets. Nor could I speak
clearly any longer, for my whole face wanted to cry. Thus I had to choose the words in
such a way that the thought of my wanting to cry would appear ludicrous to the
listeners.
 " 'Madame,' I said, 'I must play now because --' As I had forgotten the reason I
abruptly sat down at the piano. And then I remembered again. The pianist stood up
and stepped tactfully over the bench, for I was blocking his way. 'Please turn out the
light, I can only play in the dark.' I straightened myself.
 "At that moment two gentlemen seized the bench and, whistling a song and
rocking me to and fro, carried me far away from the piano to the dining table.
 "Everyone watched with approval and the girl said: 'You see, madame, he
played quite well. I knew he would. And you were so worried.'
 "I understood and thanked her with a bow, which I carried out well.
 "They poured me some lemonade and a girl with red lips held my glass while I
drank. The hostess offered me a meringue on a silver salver and a girl in a pure white
dress put the meringue in my mouth. Another girl, voluptuous and with a mass of fair
hair, held a bunch of grapes over me, and all I had to do was pluck them off with my
lips while she gazed into my receding eyes.
 "Since everyone was treating me so well I was a little surprised that they were
so unanimous in holding me back when I tried to return to the piano.
 " 'That's enough now,' said the host, whom I had not noticed before. He went
out and promptly returned with an enormous top hat and a copper-brown overcoat
with a flowery design. 'Here are your things.'
$ 60
 "They weren't my things, of course, but I didn't want to put him to the trouble
of looking again. The host helped me into the overcoat which fitted beautifully,
clinging tightly to my thin body. Bending over slowly, a lady with a kind face buttoned
the coat all the way down.
 " 'Goodbye,' said the hostess, 'and come back soon. You know you're always
welcome.' Whereupon everyone bowed as though they thought it necessary. I tried to
do likewise, but my coat was too tight. So I took my hat and, no doubt awkwardly,
walked out of the room.
 "But as I passed through the front door with short steps I was assaulted from
the sky by moon and stars and a great vaulted expanse, and from the Ringplatz by the
Town Hall, the Virgin's pillar, the church.
 "I walked calmly from the shadow into the moonlight, unbuttoned my
overcoat, and warmed myself; then I put a stop to the humming of the night by raising
my hands, and began to reflect as follows:
 " 'What is it that makes you all behave as though you were real? Are you trying
to make me believe I'm unreal, standing here absurdly on the green pavement? You,
sky, surely it's a long time since you've been real, and as for you, Ringplatz, you never
have been real.
 "'It's true, you're all still superior to me, but only when I leave you alone.
 " 'Thank God, moon, you are no longer moon, but perhaps it's negligent of me
to go on calling you so-called moon, moon. Why do your spirits fall when I call you
"forgotten paper lantern of a strange color"? And why do you almost withdraw when I
call you "the Virgin's pillar"? As for you, pillar of the Virgin Mary, I hardly recognize
your threatening attitude when I call you "moon shedding yellow light."
$ 61
 " 'It really seems to me that thinking about you doesn't do you any good; you
lose in courage and health.
 " 'God, how much more profitable it would be if the Thinker could learn from
the Drunk!
 " 'Why has everything become so quiet? I think the wind has dropped. And the
small houses which often used to roll across the square as though on little wheels are
rooted to the spot -- calm -- calm -- one can't even see the thin black line that used to
separate them from the ground.'
 "And I started to run. I ran unimpeded three times around the great square,
and as I didn't meet a drunk I ran on toward the Karlsgasse without slowing down and
without any effort. My shadow, often smaller than myself, ran beside me along the wall
as though in a gorge between the wall and the street level.
 "As I passed the fire station I heard a noise coming from the Kleiner Ring, and
as I turned into it I saw a drunk standing by the iron railing of the fountain, his arms
held out sideways and his feet in wooden shoes stamping the ground.
 "Stopping to get my breath, I went up to him, raised my top hat, and
introduced myself:
 " 'Good evening, gentle nobleman, I am twenty-three years of age, but as yet I
have no name. But you, no doubt, hail from the great city of Paris -- bearing
extraordinary, well-nigh singable names. You are surrounded by the quite unnatural
odor of the dissolute Court of France. No doubt your tinted eyes have beheld those
great ladies standing on the high shining terrace, ironically twisting their narrow
waists while the ends of their decorated trains, spread over the steps, are still lying on
the sand in the garden. -- And surely, menservants in daringly cut gray tailcoats and
white knee breeches climb tall poles, their legs hugging them but their torsos
$ 62
frequently bent back and to the side, for they have to raise enormous gray linen sheets
off the ground with thick ropes and spread them in the air, because the great lady has
expressed the wish for a misty morning.'
 "When he belched I felt almost frightened. 'Is it really true, sir,' I said, 'that you
hail from our Paris, from that tempestuous Paris -- ah, from that luxuriant hailstorm?'
 "When he belched again, I said with embarrassment: 'I know, a great honor is
being bestowed upon me.'
 "And with nimble fingers I buttoned up my overcoat; then with ardor and yet
timidly I said: 'I know you do not consider me worthy of an answer, but if I did not ask
you today my life would be spent in weeping. I ask you, much-bespangled sir, is it true
what I have been told? Are there people in Paris who consist only of sumptuous
dresses, and are there houses that are only portals, and is it true that on summer days
the sky over the city is a fleeting blue embellished only by little white clouds glued
onto it, all in the shape of hearts? And have they a highly popular panopticon there
containing nothing but trees to which small plaques are fastened bearing the names of
the most famous heroes, criminals, and lovers?
 " 'And then this other piece of news! This clearly fabricated news! These Paris
streets, for instance, they suddenly branch off, don't they? They're turbulent, aren't
they? Things are not always as they should be, how could they be, after all? Sometimes
there's an accident, people gather together from the side streets with that urban stride
that hardly touches the pavement; they are all filled with curiosity, but also with fear of
disappointment; they breathe fast and stretch out their little heads. But when they
touch one another they bow low and apologize: "I'm awfully sorry -- I didn't mean it --
there's such a crowd; forgive me, I beg you -- it was most clumsy of me, I admit. My
name is -- my name's Jerome Faroche, I'm a grocer in the rue de Cabotin -- allow me
to invite you to lunch tomorrow -- my wife would also be delighted."
$ 63
 " 'So they go on talking while the street lies numb and the smoke from the
chimneys falls between the houses. That's how it is. Butit might happen that two
carriages stop on a crowded boulevard of a distinguished neighborhood. Seriouslooking menservants open the doors. Eight elegant Siberian wolfhounds come
prancing out and jump barking across the boulevard. And it's said that they are young
Parisian dandies in disguise.'
 "His eyes were almost shut. When I fell silent, he stuck both hands in his
mouth and tore at his lower jaw. His clothes were covered with dirt. Perhaps he had
been thrown out of some tavern and hadn't yet realized it.
 "Perhaps it was that short quiet lull between night and day when our heads loll
back unexpectedly, when everything stands still without our knowing it, since we are
not looking at it, and then disappears; we remain alone, our bodies bent, then look
around but no longer see anything, nor even feel any resistance in the air yet inwardly
we cling to the memory that at a certain distance from us stand houses with roofs and
with fortunately angular chimneys down which the darkness flows through garrets
into various rooms. And it is fortunate that tomorrow will be a day on which, unlikely
as it may seem, one will be able to see everything.
 "Now the drunk jerked up his eyebrows so that a brightness appeared between
them and his eyes, and he explained in fits and starts: 'It's like this, you see -- I'm
sleepy, you see, so that's why I'm going to sleep. -- You see, I've a brother-in-law on the
Wenzelsplatz -- that's where I'm going, for I live there, for that's where I have my bed -
- so I'll be off --. But I don't know his name, you see, or where he lives -- seems I've
forgotten -- but never mind, for I don't even know if I have a brother-in-law at all. --
But I'll be off now, you see --. Do you think I'll find him?'
 "To which, without thinking, I said: 'That's certain. But you're coming from
abroad and your servants don't happen to be with you. Allow me to show you the way.'
$ 64
 "He didn't answer. So I offered him my arm, to give him some support."
d Continued Conversation Between
the Fat Man and the Supplicant
 For some time already I had been trying to cheer myself up. I rubbed my body
and said to myself: "It's time you spoke. You're becoming embarrassed. Do you feel
oppressed? Just wait! You know these situations. Think it over at your leisure. Even the
landscape will wait.
 "It's the same as it was at the party last week. Someone is reading aloud from a
manuscript. At his request I myself have copied one $. When I see my handwriting
among the pages written by him, I take fright. It's without any stability. People are
bending over it from three sides of the table. In tears, I swear it's not my handwriting."
 "But what is the connection with today? It's entirely up to you to start a sensible
conversation. Everything's peaceful. Just make an effort, my friend! -- You surely can
find an objection. -- You can say: 'I'm sleepy. I've a headache. Goodbye.' Quick then,
quick! Make yourself conspicuous! -- What's that? Again obstacles and more
obstacles? What does it remind you of? -- I remember a high plateau which rose
against the wide sky as a shield to the earth. I saw it from a mountain and prepared
myself to wander through it. I began to sing."
 My lips were dry and disobedient as I said: "Ought it not to be possible to live
differently?"
 "No," he said, questioning, smiling.
$ 65
 "But why do you pray in church every evening?" I asked then, while everything
between him and me, which until then I had been holding together, as though in my
sleep, collapsed.
 "Oh, why should we talk about it? People who live alone have no responsibility
in the evenings. One fears a number of things -- that one's body could vanish, that
human beings may really be what they appear to be at twilight, that one might not be
allowed to walk without a stick, that it might be a good idea to go to church and pray
at the top of one's voice in order to be looked at and acquire a body."
 Because he talked like that and then fell silent, I pulled my red handkerchief
out of my pocket, bent my head, and wept.
 He stood up, kissed me, and said: "What are you crying for? You're tall, I like
that; you have long hands which all but obey your will; why aren't you happy about it?
Always wear dark cuffs, that's my advice. -- No -- I flatter you and yet you cry? I think
you cope quite sensibly with the difficulty of living."
 "We build useless war machines, towers, walls, curtains of silk, and we could
marvel at all this a great deal if we had the time. We tremble in the balance, we don't
fall, we flutter, even though we may be uglier than bats. And on a beautiful day hardly
anyone can prevent us from saying: 'Oh God, today is a beautiful day,' for we are
already established on this earth and live by virtue of an agreement.
 "For we are like tree trunks in the snow. They lie there apparently flat on the
ground and it looks as though one could push them away with a slight kick. But no,
one can't, for they are firmly stuck to the ground. So you see even this is only
apparent."
 The following thought prevented me from sobbing: "It is night and no one will
reproach me tomorrow for what I might say now, for it could have been said in my
$ 66
sleep."
 Then I said: "Yes, that's it, but what were we talking about? We can't have been
talking about the light in the sky because we are standing in the darkness of a hallway.
No -- we could have talked about it, nevertheless, for are we not free to say what we
like in conversation? After all, we're not aiming at any definite purpose or at the truth,
but simply at making jokes and having a good time. Even so, couldn't you tell me the
story of the woman in the garden once more? How admirable, how clever this woman
is! We must follow her example. How fond I am of her! So it's a good thing I met you
and waylaid you as I did. It has given me great pleasure to talk to you. I've learned
several things that, perhaps intentionally, were hitherto unknown to me. -- I'm
grateful."
 He looked pleased. And although contact with a human body is always
repugnant to me, I couldn't help embracing him.
 Then we stepped out of the hallway under the sky. My friend blew away a few
bruised little clouds, allowing the uninterrupted surface of the stars to emerge. He
walked with difficulty.
iv DROWNING OF THE FAT MAN
 And now everything was seized by speed and fell into the distance. The water
of the river was dragged toward a precipice, tried to resist, whirled about a little at the
crumbling edge, but then crashed in foaming smoke.
 The fat man could not go on talking, he was forced to turn and disappear in the
$ 67
loud roar of the waterfall.
 I, who had experienced so many pleasant diversions, stood on the bank and
watched. "What are our lungs supposed to do?" I shouted. Shouted: "If they breathe
fast they suffocate themselves from inner poisons; if they breathe slowly they suffocate
from unbreathable air, from outraged things. But if they try to search for their own
rhythm they perish from the mere search."
 Meanwhile the banks of the river stretched beyond all bounds, and yet with the
palm of my hand I touched the metal of a signpost which gleamed minutely in the far
distance. This I really couldn't quite understand. After all I was small, almost smaller
than usual, and a bush of white hips shaking itself very fast towered over me. This I
saw, for a moment ago it had been close to me.
 Nevertheless I was mistaken, for my arms were as huge as the clouds of a
steady country rain, save that they were more hasty. I don't know why they were trying
to crush my poor head. It was no larger than an ant's egg, but slightly damaged, and as
a result no longer quite round. I made some beseeching, twisting movements with it,
for the expression of my eyes could not have noticed, they were so small.
 But my legs, my impossible legs lay over the wooded mountains and gave shade
to the village-studded valleys. They grew and grew! They already reached into the
space that no longer owned any landscape, for some time their length had gone
beyond my field of vision.
 But no, it isn't like that -- after all, I'm small, small for the time being -- I'm
rolling -- I'm rolling -- I'm an avalanche in the mountains! Please, passers-by, be so
kind as to tell me how tall I am -- just measure these arms, these legs.
$ 68
III
 "Let me think," said my acquaintance, who had accompanied me from the party
and was walking quietly beside me on a path up the Laurenziberg. "Just stand still a
moment so that I can get it clear. -- I have something to settle, you know. It's all such a
strain -- the night is radiant, though rather cold, but this discontented wind, it
sometimes even seems to change the position of those acacias."
 The moon made the gardener's house cast a shadow over the slightly humped
path on which lay scanty patches of snow. When I saw the bench that stood beside the
door, I pointed at it with a raised finger, and as I was not brave and expected
reproaches I laid my left hand on my chest.
 He sat down wearily, disregarding his beautiful clothes, and astonished me by
pressing his elbows against his hips and laying his forehead on the tips of his
overstretched fingers.
 "Yes, now I want to say this. You know, I live a regular life. No fault can be
found with it, everything I do is considered correct and generally approved.
Misfortune, as it is known in the society I frequent, has not spared me, as my
surroundings and I have realized with satisfaction, and even the general good fortune
has not failed me and I myself have been able to talk about it in a small circle of
friends. True, until now I had never been really in love. I regretted it occasionally, but
used the phrase when I needed it. And now I must confess: Yes, I am in love and quite
beside myself with excitement. I am an ardent lover, just what the girls dream of. But
ought I not to have considered that just this former lack of mine gave an exceptional
and gay, an especially gay, twist to my circumstances?"
 "Calm yourself," I said without interest, thinking only of myself. "Your loved
$ 69
one is beautiful, as I couldn't help hearing."
 "Yes, she is beautiful. While sitting next to her, all I could think was: What an
adventure -- am I not daring! -- there I go embarking on a sea voyage -- drinking wine
by the gallon. But when she laughs she doesn't show her teeth as one would expect;
instead, all one sees is the dark, narrow, curved opening of the mouth. Now this looks
sly and senile, even though she throws back her head while laughing."
 "I can't deny that," I said, sighing. "I've probably seen it, too, for it must be
conspicuous. But it's not only that. It's the beauty of girls altogether. Often when I see
dresses with manifold pleats, frills, and flounces smoothly clinging to beautiful bodies,
it occurs to me that they will not remain like this for long, that they will get creases
that cannot be ironed out, dust will gather in the trimmings too thick to be removed,
and that no one will make herself so miserable and ridiculous as every day to put on
the same precious dress in the morning and take it off at night. And yet I see girls who
are beautiful enough, displaying all kinds of attractive muscles and little bones and
smooth skin and masses of fine hair, and who appear every day in the same natural
fancy dress, always laying the same face in the same palm and letting it be reflected in
the mirror. Only sometimes at night, on returning late from a party, this face stares
out at them from the mirror worn out, swollen, already seen by too many people,
hardly worth wearing any more."
 "I've asked you several times on our walk whether you found my girl beautiful,
but you always turned away without answering. Tell me, are you up to some mischief?
Why don't you comfort me?"
 I dug my feet into the shadow and said kindly: "You don't need to be
comforted. After all, you're being loved." To avoid catching cold I held over my mouth
a handkerchief with a design of blue grapes.
 Now he turned toward me and leaned his fat face against the low back of the
$ 70
bench: "Actually I've still time, you know. I can still end this budding love affair at
once, either by committing some misdeed, by unfaithfulness, or by going off to some
distant land. For I've grave doubts about whether I should let myself in for all this
excitement. Nothing is certain, no one can tell the direction or the duration for sure. If
I go into a tavern with the intention of getting drunk, I know I'll be drunk that evening.
But in this case! In a week's time we're planning to go on an excursion with some
friends. Imagine the storm this will create in the heart for the next fortnight! Last
night's kisses make me sleepy and prepare the way for savage dreams. I fight this by
going for a walk at night, with the result that I'm in a permanent state of turmoil, my
face goes hot and cold as though blown about by the wind, I have to keep fingering a
pink ribbon in my pocket all the time, I'm filled with the gravest apprehensions about
myself which I cannot follow up, and I can even stand your company, sir, wheareas
normally I would never spend so much time talking to you."
 I was feeling very cold and the sky was already turning a whitish color. "I'm
afraid no misdeed, no unfaithfulness or departure to some distant land will be of any
avail. You'll have to kill yourself," I said, adding a smile.
 Opposite us on the other side of the avenue stood two bushes and down below
these bushes was the town. There were still a few lights on.
 "All right," he cried, and hit the bench with his little tight fist which, however,
he left lying there. "But you go on living. You don't kill yourself. No one loves you. You
don't achieve anything. You can't cope with the next moment. Yet you dare to talk to
me like that, you brute. You're incapable of loving, only fear excites you. Just take a
look at my chest."
 Whereupon he quickly opened his overcoat and waistcoat and his shirt. His
chest was indeed broad and beautiful.
 "Yes, such obstinate moods come over one sometimes," I began to say. "This
$ 71
summer I was in a village which lay by a river. I remember it well. I frequently sat on a
bench by the shore in a twisted position. There was a hotel, and one often heard the
sound of violins. Young healthy people sat in the garden at tables with beer and talked
of hunting and adventures. And on the other shore were cloudlike mountains."
 Then, with a limp, distorted mouth, I got up, stepped onto the lawn behind the
bench, broke a few snow-covered twigs, and whispered into my acquaintance's ear:
"I'm engaged, I confess it."
 My acquaintance wasn't surprised that I had got up. "You're engaged?" He sat
there really quite exhausted, supported only by the back of the bench. Then he took
off his hat and I saw his hair which, scented and beautifully combed, set off the round
head on a fleshy neck in a sharp curving line, as was the fashion that winter.
 I was pleased to have answered him so cleverly. "Just think," I said to myself,
"how he moves in society with flexible neck and free-swinging arms. Keeping up an
intelligent conversation, he can steer a lady right through a drawing room, and the fact
that it's raining outside, that some timid man is standing about or some other
wretched thing is happening, does not make him nervous. No, he goes on bowing with
the same courtesy to the ladies. And there he sits now."
 My acquaintance mopped his brow with a batiste handkerchief. "Please put
your hand on my forehead," he said. "I beg you." When I didn't do so at once, he folded
his hands.
 As though our sorrow had darkened everything, we sat high up on the
mountain as in a small room, although a little earlier we had already noticed the light
and the wind of the morning. We sat close together in spite of not liking one another
at all, but we couldn't move far apart because the walls were firmly and definitely
drawn. We could, however, behave absurdly and without human dignity, for we didn't
have to be ashamed in the presence of the branches above us and the trees standing
$ 72
opposite us.
 Then, without further ado, my acquaintance pulled a knife out of his pocket,
opened it thoughtfully, and then, as though he were playing, he plunged it into his left
upper arm, and didn't withdraw it. Blood promptly began to flow. His round cheeks
grew pale. I pulled out the knife, cut up the sleeve of his overcoat and jacket, tore his
shirt sleeve open. Then I ran a little way up and down the road to see if there was
anyone who could help. All the branches were almost exaggeratedly visible and
motionless. I sucked a little at the deep wound. Then I remembered the gardener's
cottage. I ran up the steps leading to the upper lawn on the left side of the house,
quickly examined the windows and doors, rang the bell furiously, and stamped my
feet, although I knew all the time that the house was uninhabited. Then I looked at the
wound which was bleeding in a thin trickle. Having wetted his handkerchief in snow, I
tied it clumsily around his arm.
 "My dear, dear friend," said I, "you've wounded yourself for my sake. You're in
such a good position, you're surrounded by well-meaning friends, you can go for a
walk in broad daylight when any number of carefully dressed people can be seen far
and near among tables or on mountain paths. Just think, in the spring we'll drive into
the orchard -- no, not we, that's unfortunately true -- but you with your Annie will
drive out at a happy trot. Oh yes, believe me, I beg you, and the sun will show you off
to everyone at your best. Oh, there'll be music, the sound of horses from afar, no need
to worry, there'll be shouting and barrel organs will be playing in the avenues."
 "Oh God," he said, stood up, leaned on me and we went on, "oh God, that won't
help. That won't make me happy. Excuse me. Is it late? Perhaps I ought to do
something in the morning. Oh God."
 A lantern was burning close to the wall above; it threw the shadows of the tree
trunks across the road and the white snow, while on the slope the shadows of all the
branches lay bent, as though broken.
$ 73
Wedding Preparations in the Country
I
 WHEN Eduard Raban, coming along the passage, walked into the open
doorway, he saw that it was raining. It was not raining much.
 On the pavement straight in front of him there were many people walking in
various rhythms. Every now and again one would step forward and cross the road. A
little girl was holding a tired puppy in her outstretched hands. Two gentlemen were
exchanging information. The one held his hands palm-upward, raising and lowering
them in regular motion, as though he were balancing a load. Then one caught sight of
a lady whose hat was heavily laden with ribbons, buckles, and flowers. And hurrying
past was a young man with a thin walking stick, his left hand, as though paralyzed, flat
$ 74
on his chest. Now and then there came men who were smoking, bearing small upright
elongated clouds along ahead of them. Three gentlemen -- two holding lightweight
overcoats on their crooked forearms -- several times walked forward from the front of
the buildings to the edge of the pavement, surveyed what was going on there, and then
withdrew again, talking.
 Through the gaps between the passers-by one could see the regularly laid
stones of the carriageway. There carriages on delicate high wheels were drawn along
by horses with arched necks. The people who sat at ease on the upholstered seats
gazed silently at the pedestrians, the shops, the balconies, and the sky. If it happened
that one carriage overtook another, then the horses would press against each other,
and the harness straps hung dangling. The animals tugged at the shafts, the carriage
bowled along, swaying as it gathered speed, until the swerve around the carriage ahead
was completed and the horses moved apart again, only their narrow quiet heads
inclined toward each other.
 Some people came quickly toward the front entrance, stopped on the dry
mosaic paving, and, turning around slowly, stood gazing out into the rain, which,
wedged in by this narrow street, fell confusedly.
 Raban felt tired. His lips were as pale as the faded red of his thick tie, which had
a Moorish pattern. The lady by the doorsteps over there, who had up to now been
contemplating her shoes, which were quite visible under her tightly drawn skirt, now
looked at him. She did so indifferently, and she was perhaps, in any case, only looking
at the falling rain in front of him or at the small nameplates of firms that were fixed to
the door over his head. Raban thought she looked amazed. "Well," he thought, "if I
could tell her the whole story, she would cease to be astonished. One works so
feverishly at the office that afterwards one is too tired even to enjoy one's holidays
properly. But even all that work does not give one a claim to be treated lovingly by
everyone; on the contrary, one is alone, a total stranger and only an object of curiosity.
$ 75
And so long as you say 'one' instead of 'I,' there's nothing in it and one can easily tell
the story; but as soon as you admit to yourself that it is you yourself, you feel as though
transfixed and are horrified."
 He put down the suitcase with the checkered cloth cover, bending his knees in
doing so. The rain water was already running along the edge of the carriageway in
streaks that almost extended to the lower-lying gutters.
 "But if I myself distinguish between 'one' and 'I,' how then dare I complain
about the others? Probably they're not unjust, but I'm too tired to take it all in. I'm
even too tired to walk all the way to the station without an effort, and it's only a short
distance. So why don't I remain in town over these short holidays, in order to
recuperate? How unreasonable I'm being! -- The journey will make me ill, I know that
quite well. My room won't be comfortable enough, it can't be otherwise in the country.
And we're hardly in the first half of June, the air in the country is often still very cool.
Of course, I've taken precautions in my clothing, but I shall have to join with people
who go for walks late in the evening. There are ponds there; one will go for a walk the
length of those ponds. That is where I'm sure to catch cold. On the other hand, I shall
make but little showing in conversation. I shan't be able to compare the pond with
other ponds in some remote country, for I've never traveled, and talking about the
moon and feeling bliss and rapturously climbing up on heaps of rubble is, after all,
something I'm too old to do without being laughed to scorn."
 People were going past with slightly bent heads, above which they carried their
dark umbrellas in a loose grip. A dray also went by; on the driver's seat, which was
stuffed with straw, sat a man whose legs were stretched out so negligently that one
foot was almost touching the ground, while the other rested safely on straw and rags.
It looked as though he were sitting in a field in fine weather. Yet he was holding the
reins attentively so that the dray, on which iron bars were clanging against one
another, made its way safely through the dense traffic. On the wet surface of the road
$ 76
one could see the reflection of the iron meanderingly and slowly gliding from one row
of cobbles to the next. The little boy beside the lady opposite was dressed like an old
vintner. His pleated dress formed a great circle at the hem and was only held in,
almost under the very armpits, by a leather strap. His hemispherical cap came down to
his eyebrows, and a tassel hung down from the top as far as his left ear. He was pleased
by the rain. He ran out of the doorway and looked up wide-eyed into the sky in order
to catch more of the rain. Often he jumped high into the air so that the water splashed
a great deal and passers-by admonished him severely. Then the lady called him and
henceforth held him by the hand; yet he did not cry.
 Raban started. Had it not grown late? Since he wore his topcoat and jacket
open, he quickly pulled out his watch. It was not going. Irritably he asked a neighbor,
who was standing a little farther back in the entrance, what the time was. This man
was in conversation, and while still laughing together with his companion, said:
"Certainly. Past four o'clock," and turned away.
 Raban quickly put up his umbrella and picked up his suitcase. But when he was
about to step into the street, his way was blocked by several women in a hurry and
these he therefore let pass first. In doing so he looked down on a little girl's hat, which
was made of plaited red straw and had a little green wreath on the wavy brim.
 He went on remembering this even when he was in the street, which went
slightly uphill in the direction he wished to follow. Then he forgot it, for now he had to
exert himself a little; his small suitcase was none too light, and the wind was blowing
straight against him, making his coat flutter and bending the front spokes of his
umbrella.
 He had to breathe more deeply. A clock in a nearby square down below struck
a quarter to five; under the umbrella he saw the light short steps of the people coming
toward him; carriage wheels squeaked with the brakes on, turning more slowly; the
horses stretched their thin forelegs, daring as chamois in the mountains.
$ 77
 Then it seemed to Raban that he would get through the long bad time of the
next fortnight, too. For it was only a fortnight, that was to say, a limited period, and
even if the annoyances grew ever greater, still, the time during which one had to
endure them would be growing shorter and shorter. Thus, undoubtedly courage would
increase. "All the people who try to torment me, and who have now occupied the
entire space around me, will quite gradually be thrust back by the beneficent passage
of these days, without my having to help them even in the very least. And, as it will
come about quite naturally, I can be weak and quiet and let everything happen to me,
and yet everything must turn out well, through the sheer fact of the passing of the
days.
 "And besides, can't I do it the way I always used to as a child in matters that
were dangerous? I don't even need to go to the country myself, it isn't necessary. I'll
send my clothed body. If it staggers out of the door of my room, the staggering will
indicate not fear but its nothingness. Nor is it a sign of excitement if it stumbles on the
stairs, if it travels into the country, sobbing as it goes, and there eats its supper in tears.
For I myself am meanwhile lying in my bed, smoothly covered over with the yellowbrown blanket, exposed to the breeze that is wafted through that seldom-aired room.
The carriages and people in the street move and walk hesitantly on shining ground, for
I am still dreaming. Coachmen and pedestrians are shy, and every step they want to
advance they ask as a favor from me, by looking at me. I encourage them and
encounter no obstacle.
 "As I lie in bed I assume the shape of a big beetle, a stag beetle or a cockchafer, I
think."
 In front of a shopwindow, in which, behind a wet glass pane, little hats for men
were displayed on small pegs, he stopped and looked in, his lips pursed. "Well, my hat
will still do for the holidays," he thought and walked on, "and if nobody can stand me
because of my hat, then all the better.
$ 78
 "The form of a large beetle, yes. Then I would pretend it was a matter of
hibernating, and I would press my little legs to my bulging belly. And I would whisper
a few words, instructions to my sad body, which stands close beside me, bent. Soon I
shall have done -- it bows, it goes swiftly, and it will manage everything efficiently
while I rest."
 He came to a domed arch at the top of the steep street, leading onto a small
square all around which there were many shops, already lit up. In the middle of the
square, somewhat obscured by the light around the edge, was a low monument, the
seated meditative figure of a man. The people moved across the lights like narrow
shutters, and since the puddles spread all the brilliance far and wide, the square
seemed ceaselessly changing.
 Raban pressed far on into the square, but jerkily, dodging the drifting carriages,
jumping from one dry cobble to further dry cobbles, and holding the open umbrella
high in his hand in order to see everything all around. Finally, by a lamppost -- a place
where the electric tram stopped -- which was set up on a small square concrete base,
he halted.
 "But they're expecting me in the country. Won't they be wondering about me
by this time? Still, I haven't written to her all the week she's been in the country, until
this morning. So they'll end up by imagining that even my appearance is quite
different. They may be thinking that I burst forward when I address a person, yet that
isn't my way at all, or that I embrace people when I arrive, and that's something I don't
do either. I shall make them angry if I try to pacify them. Oh, if I could only make
them thoroughly angry in the attempt to pacify them."
 At that moment an open carriage drove past, not quickly; behind its two
lighted lamps two ladies could be seen sitting on dark leather seats. One was leaning
back, her face hidden by a veil and the shadow of her hat. But the other lady was
sitting bolt upright; her hat was small, it was edged with thin feathers. Everyone could
$ 79
see her. Her lower lip was drawn slightly into her mouth.
 As soon as the carriage had passed Raban, some bar blocked the view of the
near horse drawing the carriage; then some coachman -- wearing a big top hat -- on an
unusually high box was moved across in front of the ladies -- this was now much
farther on -- then their carriage drove around the corner of a small house that now
became strikingly noticeable, and disappeared from sight.
 Raban followed it with his gaze, his head lowered, resting the handle of his
umbrella on his shoulder in order to see better. He had put his right thumb into his
mouth and was rubbing his teeth on it. His suitcase lay beside him, one of its sides on
the ground.
 Carriages hastened from street to street across the square, the horses' bodies
flew along horizontally as though they were being flung through the air, but the
nodding of the head and the neck revealed the rhythm and effort of the movement.
 Around about, on the edges of the pavements of all the three streets converging
here, there were many idlers standing about, tapping the cobbles with little sticks.
Among the groups they formed there were little towers in which girls were pouring
out lemonade, then heavy street clocks on thin bars, then men wearing before and
behind them big placards announcing entertainments in multicolored letters, then
messengers. . . [Two pages missing]. . . a little social gathering. Two elegant private
carriages, driving diagonally across the square into the street leading downhill, got in
the way of some gentlemen from this party, but after the second carriage -- even after
the first they had timidly tried to do so -- these gentlemen formed into a group again
with the others, with whom they then stepped onto the pavement in a long cavalcade
and pushed their way through the door of a café, overwhelmed by the light of the
incandescent lamps hanging over the entrance.
 Electric tramcars moved past, huge and very close; others, vaguely visible, stood
$ 80
motionless far away in the streets.
 "How bent she is," Raban thought when he looked at the photograph now.
"She's never really upright and perhaps her back is round. I shall have to pay much
attention to this. And her mouth is so wide, and here, beyond doubt, the lower lip
protrudes, yes, now I remember that too. And what a dress! Of course, I don't know
anything about clothes, but these very tight-sewn sleeves are ugly, I am sure, they look
like bandages. And the hat, the brim at every point turned up from the face in a
different curve. But her eyes are beautiful, they're brown, if I'm not mistaken. Everyone
says her eyes are beautiful."
 Now an electric tramcar stopped in front of Raban and many people around
him pushed toward the steps, with slightly open, pointed umbrellas, which they held
upright with their hands pressed to their shoulders. Raban, who was holding his
suitcase under his arm, was dragged off the pavement and stepped hard into an unseen
puddle. Inside the tram a child knelt on a seat, pressing the tips of all its fingers to its
lips as though it were saying goodbye to someone going away. Some passengers got
out and had to walk a few paces along the tram in order to work their way out of the
crowd. Then a lady climbed onto the first step, her long skirt, which she hitched up
with both hands, stretched tightly around her legs. A gentleman held on to a brass rod
and, with lifted head, recounted something to the lady. All the people who wanted to
get in were impatient. The conductor shouted.
 Raban, who now stood on the edge of the waiting group, turned around, for
someone had called out his name.
 "Ah, Lement," he said slowly and held out to a young man coming toward him
the little finger of the hand in which he was holding the umbrella.
 "So this is the bridegroom on his way to his bride. He looks frightfully in love,"
Lement said and then smiled with his mouth shut.
$ 81
 "Yes, you must forgive my going today," Raban said. "I wrote to you this
afternoon, anyway. I should, of course, have liked very much to travel with you
tomorrow; but tomorrow is Saturday, everything'll be so crowded, it's a long journey."
 "Oh, that doesn't matter. You did promise, but when one's in love. . . I shall just
have to travel alone." Lement had set one foot on the pavement and the other on the
cobbles, supporting his body now on one leg, now on the other. "You were going to get
into the tram. There it goes. Come, we'll walk, I'll go with you. There's still plenty of
time."
 "Isn't it rather late, please tell me?"
 "It's no wonder you're nervous, but you really have got plenty of time. I'm not
so nervous, and that's why I've missed Gillemann now."
 "Gillemann? Won't he be staying out there, too?"
 "Yes, with his wife; it's next week they mean to go, and that's just why I
promised Gillemann I'd meet him today when he leaves the office. He wanted to give
me some instructions regarding the furnishing of their house, that's why I was
supposed to meet him. But now somehow I'm late, I had some errands to do. And just
as I was wondering whether I shouldn't go to their apartment, I saw you, was at first
astonished at the suitcase, and spoke to you. But now the evening's too far gone for
paying calls, it's fairly impossible to go to Gillemann now."
 "Of course. And so I shall meet people I know there, after all. Not that I have
ever seen Frau Gillemann, though."
 "And very beautiful she is. She's fair, and pale now after her illness. She has the
most beautiful eyes I've ever seen."
$ 82
 "Do please tell me, what do beautiful eyes look like? Is it the glance? I've never
found eyes beautiful."
 "All right, perhaps I was exaggerating slightly. Still, she's a pretty woman."
 Through the windowpane of a ground-floor café, close to the window,
gentlemen could be seen sitting, reading and eating, around a three-sided table; one
had lowered a newspaper to the table, held a little cup raised, and was looking into the
street out of the corners of his eyes. Beyond these window tables all the furniture and
equipment in the large restaurant were hidden by the customers, who sat side by side
in little circles. [Two pages missing]. . . "As it happens, however, it's not such an
unpleasant business, is it? Many people would take on such a burden, I think."
 They came into a fairly dark square, which began on their side of the street, for
the opposite side extended farther. On the side of the square along which they were
walking, there was an uninterrupted row of houses, from the corners of which two --
at first widely distant -- rows of houses extended into the indiscernible distance in
which they seemed to unite. The pavement was narrow by the houses, which were
mostly small; there were no shops to be seen, no carriage passed. An iron post near the
end of the street out of which they came had several lamps on it, which were fixed in
two rings hanging horizontally, one over the other. The trapeze-shaped flame between
conjoined sheets of glass burned in this towerlike wide darkness as in a little room,
letting darkness assert itself a few steps farther on.
 "But now I am sure it is too late; you have kept it a secret from me, and I shall
miss the train. Why?" [Four pages missing]
 . . . "Yes, at most Pirkershofer -- well, for what he's worth."
 "The name's mentioned, I think, in Betty's letters, he's an assistant railwayclerk, isn't he?"
$ 83
 "Yes, an assistant railway-clerk and an unpleasant person. You'll see I'm right as
soon as you've got a glimpse of that small thick nose. I tell you, walking through the
dreary fields with that fellow. . . Anyway, he's been transferred now and he goes away
from there, as I believe and hope, next week."
 "Wait, you said just now you advised me to stay here tonight. I've thought it
over; it couldn't very well be managed. I've written to say I'm coming this evening;
they'll be expecting me."
 "That's quite easy, send a telegram."
 "Yes, that could be done -- but it wouldn't be very nice if I didn't go -- and I'm
tired, yes, I'll go all right. If a telegram came, they'd get a fright, into the bargain. --
And what for, where would we go, anyway?"
 "Then it's really better for you to go. I was only thinking. . . Anyway I couldn't
go with you today, as I'm sleepy, I forgot to tell you that. And now I shall say goodbye,
for I don't want to go through the wet park with you, as I should like to drop in at
Gillemann's, after all. It's a quarter to six, so not too late, after all, for paying calls on
people you know fairly well. Addio. Well, a good journey, and remember me to
everyone!"
 Lement turned to the right and held out his right hand to say goodbye, so that
for a moment Raban was walking against Lement's outstretched arm.
 "Adieu." Raban said.
 From a little distance Lement then called back: "I say, Eduard, can you hear
me? Do shut your umbrella; it stopped raining ages ago. I didn't have a chance to tell
you."
$ 84
 Raban did not answer, shut his umbrella, and the sky closed over him in pallid
darkness.
 "If at least," Raban thought, "I were to get into a wrong train. Then it would at
any rate seem to me that the whole enterprise had begun, and if later, after the mistake
had been cleared up, I were to arrive in this station again on my way back, then I
should certainly feel much better. If the scenery does turn out to be boring, as Lement
says, that need not be a disadvantage at all. One will spend more time in the rooms
and really never know for certain where all the others are, for if there is a ruin in the
district, there will probably be a walk all together to that ruin; it will have been agreed
upon some time before. Then, however, one must look forward to it; for that very
reason one mustn't miss it. But if there is no such sight to be seen, then there will be
no discussion beforehand either, for all will be expected to get together quite easily if
suddenly, against all the usual practice, a larger expedition is considered right, for one
only has to send the maid into the others' apartments, where they are sitting over a
letter or books and are delighted by this news. Well, it is not difficult to protect oneself
against such invitations. And yet I don't know whether I shall be able to, for it is not so
easy as I imagine it now when I am still alone and can still do everything, can still go
back if I want to, for I shall have no one there whom I could pay calls on whenever I
like, and no one with whom I could make more strenuous expeditions, no one there
who could show me how his crops are doing or show me a quarry he is working there.
For one isn't at all sure even of acquaintances of long standing. Wasn't Lement nice to
me today? -- he explained some things to me, didn't he, and described everything as it
will appear to me. He came up and spoke to me and then walked with me, in spite of
the fact that there was nothing he wanted to find out from me and that he himself still
had something else to do. But now all of a sudden he has gone away, and yet I can't
have offended him even with a single word. I did refuse to spend the evening in town,
but that was only natural, that can't have offended him, for he is a sensible person."
 The station clock struck, it was a quarter to six. Raban stopped because he had
$ 85
palpitations, then he walked quickly along the park pool, went along a narrow, badly
lighted path between large shrubs, rushed into an open place with many empty
benches leaning against little trees, then went more slowly through an opening in the
railings into the street, crossed it, leapt through the station entrance, after a while
found the booking office, and had to knock for a while on the iron shutter. Then the
booking clerk looked out, said it was really high time, took the bank note, and
slammed down on the counter the ticket he had been asked for and the change. Now
Raban tried to count his change quickly, thinking he ought to be getting more, but a
porter who was walking nearby hurried him through a glass door onto the platform.
There Raban looked around, while calling out "Thank you, thank you!" to the porter,
and since he found no guard, he climbed up the steps of the nearest coach by himself,
each time putting the suitcase on the step above and then following himself,
supporting himself on his umbrella with one hand, and on the handle of the suitcase
with the other. The coach that he entered was brightly illuminated by the great
amount of light from the main hall of the station, in which it was standing; in front of
many a windowpane -- all were shut right up to the top -- a hissing arc lamp hung at
about eye level, and the many raindrops on the glass were white, often single ones
would move. Raban could hear the noise from the platform even when he had shut the
carriage door and sat down on the last little free bit of a light-brown wooden seat. He
saw many people's backs, and the backs of their heads, and between them the
upturned faces of people on the seat opposite. In some places smoke was curling from
pipes and cigars, in one place drifting limply past the face of a girl. Often the
passengers would change places, discussing these changes with each other, or they
would transfer their luggage, which lay in a narrow blue net over a seat, to another
one. If a stick or the metal-covered corner of a suitcase stuck out, then the owner
would have his attention drawn to this. He would go over and straighten it. Raban also
bethought himself and pushed his suitcase under his seat.
 On his left, at the window, two gentlemen were sitting opposite each other,
talking about the price of goods. "They're commercial travelers," Raban thought and,
$ 86
breathing regularly, he gazed at them. "The merchant sends them into the country,
they obey, they travel by train, and in every village they go from shop to shop.
Sometimes they travel by carriage between the villages. They must not stay long
anywhere, for everything must be done fast, and they must always talk only about their
goods. With what pleasure, then, one can exert oneself in an occupation that is so
agreeable!"
 The younger man had jerked a notebook out of the hip pocket of his trousers,
rapidly flicked the leaves over with a forefinger moistened on his tongue, and then
read through a $, drawing the back of his fingernail down it as he went. He looked
at Raban as he glanced up and, indeed, when he now began talking about thread
prices, did not turn his face away from Raban, as one gazes steadily at a point in order
not to forget anything of what one wants to say. At the same time he drew his brows
tightly down over his eyes. He held the half-closed notebook in his left hand, with his
thumb on the $ he had been reading, in order to be able to refer to it easily if he
should need to. And the notebook trembled, for he was not supporting his arm on
anything, and the coach, which was now in motion, beat on the rails like a hammer.
 The other traveler sat leaning back, listening and nodding at regular intervals.
It was evident that he was far from agreeing with everything and later would give his
own opinion.
 Raban laid his curved hands palm-down on his knees and, leaning forward,
between the travelers' heads he saw the window and through the window lights flitting
past and others flitting away into the distance. He did not understand anything of
what the traveler was talking about, nor would he understand the other's answer.
Much preparation would first be required, for here were people who had been
concerned with goods since their youth. But if one has held a spool of thread in one's
hand so often and handed it to one's customer so often, then one knows the price and
can talk about it, while villages come toward us and flash past, while at the same time
$ 87
they turn away into the depths of the country, where for us they must disappear. And
yet these villages are inhabited, and there perhaps travelers go from shop to shop.
 In a corner at the far end of the coach a tall man stood up, holding playing
cards in his hand, and called out:
 "I say, Marie, did you pack the zephyr shirts?"
 "Of course I did," said the woman, who was sitting opposite Raban. She had
been dozing, and now when the question waked her she answered as though she were
talking to herself or to Raban. "You're going to market at Jungbunzlau, eh?" the
vivacious traveler asked her. "Jungbunzlau, that's right." "It's a big market this time,
isn't it?" "A big market, that's right." She was sleepy, she rested her left elbow on a blue
bundle, and her head dropped heavily against her hand, which pressed through the
flesh of the cheek to the cheekbone. "How young she is," the traveler said.
 Raban took the money that he had received from the cashier out of his
waistcoat pocket and counted it over. He held up each coin firmly between thumb and
forefinger for a long time and also twisted it this way and that on the inner surface of
his thumb with the tip of his forefinger. He looked for a long time at the Emperor's
image, then he was struck by the laurel wreath and the way it was fastened with knots
and bows of ribbon at the back of the head. At last he found the sum was correct and
put the money into a big black purse. But now when he was about to say to the
traveler: "They're a married couple, don't you think?" the train stopped. The noise of
the journey ceased, guards shouted the name of a place, and Raban said nothing.
 The train started again so slowly that one could picture the revolutions of the
wheels, but a moment later it was racing down a slope, and all unexpectedly the tall
railings of a bridge, outside the windows, were torn apart and pressed together, as it
seemed.
 88
 Raban was now pleased that the train was going so fast, for he would not have
wanted to stay in the last place. "When it is dark there, when one knows no one there,
when it is such a long way home. But then it must be terrible there by day. And is it
different at the next station or at the previous ones or at the later ones or at the village
I am going to?"
 The traveler was suddenly talking more loudly. "It's a long way yet," Raban
thought. "Sir, you know just as well as I do, these manufacturers send their travelers
around the most godforsaken little villages, they go crawling to the seediest of little
shopkeepers, and do you think they offer them prices different from those they offer
us big businessmen? Sir, take it from me; exactly the same prices, only yesterday I saw
it black on white. I call it villainy. They're squeezing us out of existence; under current
conditions it's simply impossible for us to do business."
 Again he looked at Raban; he was not ashamed of the tears in his eyes; he
pressed the knuckles of his left hand to his mouth because his lips were quivering.
Raban leaned back and tugged faintly at his mustache with his left hand.
 The shopwoman opposite woke up and smilingly passed her hands over her
forehead. The traveler talked more quietly. Once again the woman shifted as though
settling down to sleep, half lying on her bundle, and sighed. The skirt was drawn tight
over her right hip.
 Behind her sat a gentleman with a traveling cap on his head, reading a large
newspaper. The girl opposite him, who was probably a relative of his, urged him -- at
the same time inclining her head toward her right shoulder -- to open the window,
because it was so very hot. He said, without looking up, he would do it in a moment,
only he must first finish reading an article in the newspaper, and he showed her which
article he meant.
 The shopwoman could not go to sleep again; she sat upright and looked out of
$ 89
the window; then for a long time she looked at the oil lamp and the flame burning
yellow near the ceiling of the carriage. Raban shut his eyes for a little while.
 When he glanced up, the shopwoman was just biting into a piece of cake that
was spread with brown jam. The bundle next to her was open. The traveler was
smoking a cigar in silence and kept on fidgeting as though he were tapping the ash off
the end of it. The other was poking about in the works of a pocket watch with the tip
of a knife, so that one could hear it scraping. With his eyes almost shut Raban still had
time to see, in a blurred way, the gentleman in the traveling cap pulling at the window
strap. There came a gust of cool air, and a straw hat fell from a hook. Raban thought
he was waking up and that was why his cheeks were so refreshed, or someone was
opening the door and drawing him into the room, or he was in some way mistaken
about things, and, breathing deeply, he quickly fell asleep.
II
 The steps of the coach were still shaking a little when Raban climbed down
them. Into his face, coming out of the air of the carriage, the rain beat, and he shut his
eyes. It was raining noisily on the corrugated iron roof of the station building, but out
in the open country the rain fell in such a way that it sounded like the uninterrupted
blowing of the wind. A barefoot boy came running up -- Raban did not see from where
-- and breathlessly asked Raban to let him carry the suitcase, for it was raining; but
Raban said: Yes, it was raining, and he would therefore go by omnibus. He did not
need him, he said. Thereupon the boy pulled a face as though he thought it grander to
walk in the rain and have one's suitcase carried than to go by bus, and instantly turned
around and ran away. When Raban wanted to call him, it was already too late.
$ 90
 There were two lighted lamps, and a station official came out of a door.
Without hesitation he walked through the rain to the engine, stood there motionless
with his arms folded, and waited until the engine driver leaned over his rail and talked
to him. A porter was called, came, and was sent back again. At many of the windows in
the train there were passengers standing, and since what they had to look at was an
ordinary railway station their gaze was probably dim, the eyelids close together, as
though the train were in motion. A girl came hurrying along from the road to the
platform under a parasol with a flowered pattern; she set the open parasol on the
ground and sat down, pushing her legs apart so that her skirt should dry better, and
ran her fingertips over the tight-stretched skirt. There were only two lamps alight; her
face was indistinguishable. The porter came past and complained that puddles were
forming under the parasol; he held his arms in a semicircle before him in order to
demonstrate the size of these puddles, and then moved his hands through the air, one
after the other, like fishes sinking into deeper water, in order to make it clear that
traffic was also being impeded by this parasol.
 The train started, disappeared like a long sliding door, and behind the poplars
on the far side of the railway track there was the landscape, so massive that it took
away one's breath. Was it a dark view through a gap or was it woods, was it a pool, or a
house in which the people were already asleep, was it a church steeple or a ravine
between the hills? Nobody must dare to go there, but who could restrain himself?
 And when Raban caught sight of the official -- he was already at the step up to
his office -- he ran in front of him and stopped him: "Excuse me, please, is it far to the
village? That's where I want to go."
 "No, a quarter of an hour, but by bus -- as it's raining -- you'll be there in five
minutes."
 "It's raining. It's not a very fine spring," Raban said. The official had put his
right hand on his hip, and through the triangle formed by the arm and the body Raban
$ 91
saw the girl, who had now shut the parasol, on the seat where she sat.
 "If one is going on one's summer holidays now and is going to stay there, one
can't but regret it. Actually I thought I should be met." He glanced around to make it
seem plausible.
 "You will miss the bus, I'm afraid. It doesn't wait so long. Nothing to thank me
for. That's the road, between the hedges." The road outside the railway station was not
lighted; only from three ground-floor windows in the building there came a misty
glimmer, but it did not extend far. Raban walked on tiptoe through the mud and
shouted "Driver!" and "Hello there!" and "Omnibus!" and "Here I am!" many times. But
when he landed among scarcely interrupted puddles on the dark side of the road, he
had to tramp onwards with his heels down, until suddenly a horse's moist muzzle
touched his forehead.
 There was the omnibus; he quickly climbed into the empty compartment, sat
down by the windowpane behind the driver's box, and hunched his back into the
corner, for he had done all that was necessary. For if the driver is asleep, he will wake
up toward morning; if he is dead, then a new driver will come, or the innkeeper, and
should that not happen either, then passengers will come by the early morning train,
people in a hurry, making a noise. In any case one can be quiet, one may even draw the
curtains over the windows and wait for the jerk with which the vehicle must start.
 "Yes, after all I have already accomplished, it is certain that tomorrow I shall
get to Betty and to Mamma; nobody can prevent that. Yet it is true, and was indeed to
be foreseen, that my letter will arrive only tomorrow, so that I might very well have
remained in town and spent an agreeable night at Elvy's, without having to be afraid of
the next day's work, the sort of thing that otherwise ruins every pleasure for me. But
look, I've got my feet wet."
 He lit a stub of candle that he had taken out of his waistcoat pocket and set it
$ 92
on the seat opposite. It was bright enough, the darkness outside made it appear as
though the omnibus had black distempered walls and no glass in the windows. There
was no need to think that there were wheels under the floor and in front the horse
between the shafts. Raban rubbed his feet thoroughly on the seat, pulled on clean
socks, and sat up straight. Then he heard someone from the station shouting: "Hi!" if
there was anyone in the bus he might say so. "Yes, yes, and he would like to start now,
too," Raban answered, leaning out of the door, which he had opened, holding on to the
doorpost with his right hand, the left hand held open, close to his mouth.
 The rain gushed down the back of his neck, inside his collar.
 Wrapped in the canvas of two sacks that had been cut up, the driver came over,
the reflection of his stable lantern jumping through the puddles at his feet. Irritably he
began an explanation: listen here, he said, he had been playing cards with Lebeda and
they had just been getting on fine when the train came. It would really have been
impossible for him to take a look outside then, still, he did not mean to abuse anyone
who did not understand that. Apart from that, this place here was a filthy dump, and
no half-measures, and it was hard to see what business a gentleman like this could
have here, and he would be getting there soon enough anyway, so that he need not go
and complain anywhere. Only just now Herr Pirkershofer -- if you please, that's the
junior assistant clerk -- had come in and had said he thought a small fair man had
been wanting to go by the omnibus. Well, so he had at once come and asked, or hadn't
he at once come and asked?
 The lantern was attached to the end of the shaft; the horse, having been
shouted at in a muffled voice, began to pull, and the water on top of the bus, now set
stirring, dripped slowly through a crack into the carriage.
 The road was perhaps hilly; there was surely mud flying up into the spokes;
fans of puddle water formed, with a rushing sound, behind the turning wheels; it was
for the most part with loose reins that the driver guided the dripping horse. -- Could
$ 93
not all this be used as reproaches against Raban? Many puddles were unexpectedly lit
up by the lantern trembling on the shaft, and split up, in ripples, under the wheel. This
happened solely because Raban was traveling to his fiancée, to Betty, an oldish pretty
girl. And who, if one were going to speak of it at all, would appreciate what merits
Raban here had, even if it was only that he bore those reproaches, which admittedly
nobody could make openly. Of course he was doing it gladly. Betty was his fiancée, he
was fond of her, it would be disgusting if she were to thank him for that as well, but all
the same --
 Without meaning to, he often bumped his head on the panel against which he
was leaning, then for a while he looked up at the ceiling. Once his right hand slipped
down from his thigh, where he had been resting it. But his elbow remained in the
angle between belly and leg.
 The omnibus was now traveling between houses; here and there the inside of
the coach had a share of the light from a room; there were some steps -- to see the first
of them Raban would have had to stand up -- built up to a church; outside a park gate
there was a lamp with a large flame burning in it, but a statue of a saint stood out in
black relief only because of the light from a draper's shop, and Raban saw his candle,
which had burnt down, the trickle of wax hanging motionless from the seat.
 When the bus stopped outside the inn, and the rain could be heard loudly and -
- probably there was a window open -- so could the voices of the guests, Raban
wondered which would be better, to get out at once or to wait until the innkeeper
came to the coach. What the custom was in this township he did not know, but it was
pretty certain that Betty would have spoken of her fiancé, and according to whether
his arrival here was magnificent or feeble, so the esteem in which she was held here
would increase or diminish, and with that, again, his own, too. But of course he knew
neither what people felt about her nor what she had told them about him, and so
everything was all the more disagreeable and difficult. Oh, beautiful city and beautiful
$ 94
the way home! If it rains there, one goes home by tram over wet cobbles; here one goes
in a cart through mud to an inn. -- "The city is far from here, and if I were now in
danger of dying of homesickness, nobody could get me back there today. -- Well,
anyway, I shouldn't die -- but there I get the meal expected for that evening, set on the
table, on the right behind my plate the newspaper, on the left the lamp, here I shall be
given some dreadfully fat dish -- they don't know that I have a weak stomach, and even
if they did know -- an unfamiliar newspaper -- many people, whom I can already hear,
will be there, and one lamp will be lit for all. What sort of light can it provide? Enough
to play cards by -- but for reading a newspaper?
 "The innkeeper isn't coming, he's not interested in guests, he is probably an
unfriendly man. Or does he know that I am Betty's fiancé, and does that give him a
reason for not coming to fetch me in? It would be in accord with that that the driver
kept me waiting so long at the station. Betty has often told me, after all, how much she
has been bothered by lecherous men and how she has had to rebuff their insistence;
perhaps it is that here too. . . !" [Text breaks off]
[Second Manuscript]
 When Eduard Raban, coming along the passage, walked into the open doorway,
he could now see how it was raining. It was not raining much.
 On the pavement straight in front of him, not higher, not lower, there were, in
spite of the rain, many passers-by. Every now and again one would step forward and
cross the road.
 A little girl was carrying a gray dog on her outstretched arms. Two gentlemen
were exchanging information on some subject, at times turning the whole front of
their bodies to each other, and then slowly turning aside themselves again; it was like
$ 95
doors ajar in the wind. The one held his hands palm-upward, raising and lowering
them in regular motion, as though he were balancing a load, testing the weight of it.
Then one caught sight of a slim lady whose face twitched slightly, like the flickering
light of the stars, and whose flat hat was loaded high and to the brim with
unrecognizable objects; she appeared to be a stranger to all the passers-by, without
intending it, as though by some law. And hurrying past was a young man with a thin
walking stick, his left hand, as though paralyzed, lying flat on his chest. Many were out
on business; in spite of the fact that they walked fast, one saw them longer than others,
now on the pavement, now below; their coats fitted them badly; they did not care how
they carried themselves; they let themselves be pushed by the people and they pushed
too. Three gentlemen -- two holding lightweight overcoats on their crooked forearms
-- walked from the front of the building to the edge of the pavement, in order to see
what was going on in the carriageway and on the farther pavement.
 Through the gaps between the passers-by, now fleetingly, then comfortably,
one saw the regularly set cobbles in the carriageway, on which carriages, swaying on
their wheels, were swiftly drawn by horses with arched necks. The people who sat at
ease on the upholstered seats gazed in silence at the pedestrians, the shops, the
balconies, and the sky. If it happened that one carriage overtook another, then the
horses would press against each other, and the harness straps hung dangling. The
animals tugged at the shafts, the carriage bowled along, swaying as it gathered speed,
until the swerve around the carriage ahead was completed and the horses moved apart
again, still with their narrow heads inclined toward each other.
 An elderly gentleman came quickly toward the front entrance, stopped on the
dry mosaic paving, turned around. And he then gazed into the rain, which, wedged in
by the narrow street, fell confusedly.
 Raban put down the suitcase with the black cloth cover, bending his right knee
a little in doing so. The rain water was already running along the edge of the
$ 96
carriageway in streaks that almost extended to the lower-lying gutters.
 The elderly gentleman stood upright near Raban, who was supporting himself
by leaning slightly against the wooden doorpost; from time to rime he glanced toward
Raban, even though to do so he had to twist his neck sharply. Yet he did this only out
of the natural desire, now that he happened to be unoccupied, to observe everything
exactly, at least in his vicinity. The result of this aimless glancing hither and thither
was that there was a great deal he did not notice. So, for instance, it escaped him that
Raban's lips were very pale, not much less so than the very faded red of his tie, which
had a once striking Moorish pattern. Now, had he noticed this, he would certainly
have made a fuss about it, at least inwardly, which, again, would not have been the
right thing, for Raban was always pale, even if, it was a fact, various things might have
been making him especially tired just recently.
 "What weather!" the gentleman said in a low voice, shaking his head,
consciously, it was true, but still in a slightly senile way.
 "Yes, indeed, and when one's supposed to be starting on a journey, too," Raban
said, quickly straightening up.
 "And it isn't the kind of weather that will improve," the gentleman said and, in
order to make sure of it once more for the last time, bent forward to glance in scrutiny
up the street, then down, and then at the sky. "It may last for days, even for weeks. So
far as I recall, nothing better is forecast for June and the beginning of July, either. Well,
it's no pleasure to anyone; I for instance shall have to do without my walks, which are
extremely important to my health."
 Hereupon he yawned and seemed to become exhausted, since he had now
heard Raban's voice and, occupied with this conversation, no longer took any interest
in anything, not even in the conversation.
$ 97
 This made quite an impression on Raban, since after all the gentleman had
addressed him first, and he therefore tried to show off a little, although it might not
even be noticed. "True," he said, "in town one can very easily manage to go without
what isn't good for one. If one does not do without it, then one has only oneself to
blame for the bad consequences. One will be sorry and in this way come to see for the
first time really clearly how to manage the next time. And even if in matters of detail. .
. [Two pages missing]. . . "I don't mean anything by it. I don't mean anything at all,"
Raban hastened to say, prepared to excuse the gentleman's absent-mindedness in any
way possible, since after all he wanted to show off a little more. "It's all just out of the
book previously mentioned, which I, like other people, happen to have been reading in
the evening recently. I have been mostly alone. Owing to family circumstances, you
see. But apart from anything else, a good book is what I like best after supper. Always
has been. Just recently I read in a prospectus a quotation from some writer or other. 'A
good book is the best friend there is,' and that's really true, it is so, a good book is the
best friend there is."
 "Yes, when one is young --" the gentleman said, meaning nothing in particular
by this, merely wanting to indicate how it was raining, that the rain was heavier again,
and that now it was not going to stop at all; but to Raban it sounded as though at sixty
the gentleman still thought of himself as young and energetic and considered Raban's
thirty years nothing in comparison, and as though he meant to say besides, insofar as it
was permissible, that at the age of thirty he had, of course, been more sensible than
Raban. And that he believed even if one had nothing else to do, like himself, for
instance, an old man, yet it was really wasting one's time to stand about here in this
hall, looking at the rain, but if one spent the time, besides, in chatter, one was wasting
it doubly.
 Now Raban had believed for some time that nothing other people said about
his capabilities or opinions had been able to affect him, on the contrary, that he had
positively abandoned the position where he had listened, all submissively, to
$ 98
everything that was said, so that people were now simply wasting their breath whether
they happened to be against him or for him. And so he said: "We are talking about
different things, since you did not wait to hear what I was going to say."
 "Please go on, please go on," the gentleman said.
 "Well, it isn't so important," Raban said. "I was only going to say books are
useful in every sense and quite especially in respects in which one would not expect it.
For when one is about to embark on some enterprise, it is precisely the books whose
contents have nothing at all in common with the enterprise that are the most useful.
For the reader who does after all intend to embark on that enterprise, that is to say,
who has somehow become enthusiastic (and even if, as it were, the effect of the book
can penetrate only so far as that enthusiasm), will be stimulated by the book to all
kinds of thoughts concerning his enterprise. Now, however, since the contents of the
book are precisely something of utter indifference, the reader is not at all impeded in
those thoughts, and he passes through the midst of the book with them, as once the
Jews passed through the Red Sea, that's how I should like to put it."
 For Raban the whole person of the old gentleman now assumed an unpleasant
expression. It seemed to him as though he had drawn particularly close to him -- but it
was merely trifling. . . [Two pages missing]. . . "The newspaper, too. -- But I was about
to say, I am only going into the country, that's all, only for a fortnight; I am taking a
holiday for the first time for quite a long period, and it's necessary for other reasons
too, and yet for instance a book that I was, as I have mentioned, reading recently
taught me more about my little journey than you could imagine."
 "I am listening," the gentleman said.
 Raban was silent and, standing there so straight, put his hands into his overcoat
pockets, which were rather too high. Only after a while did the old gentleman say:
"This journey seems to be of some special importance to you."
$ 99
 "Well, you see, you see," Raban said, once more supporting himself against the
doorpost. Only now did he see how the passage had filled up with people. They were
standing even around the foot of the staircase, and an official, who had rented a room
in the apartment of the same woman as Raban had, when he came down the stairs had
to ask the people to make way for him. To Raban, who only pointed at the rain, he
called out over several heads, which now all turned to Raban, "Have a good journey"
and reiterated a promise, obviously given earlier, definitely to visit Raban the next
Sunday.
 [Two pages missing]. . . has a pleasant job, with which he is indeed satisfied and
which has always been kept open for him. He has such powers of endurance and is
inwardly so gay that he does not need anyone to keep him entertained, but everyone
needs him. He has always been healthy. Oh, don't try to tell me.
 "I am not going to argue," the gentleman said.
 "You won't argue, but you won't admit your mistake either. Why do you stick
to it so? And however sharply you may recollect now, you would, I dare wager, forget
everything if you were to talk to him. You would reproach me for not having refuted
you more effectively now. If he so much as talks about a book. He's instantly ecstatic
about everything beautiful. . ."
$ 100
The Judgment
 IT WAS a Sunday morning in the very height of spring. Georg Bendemann, a
young merchant, was sitting in his own room on the first floor of one of a long row of
small, ramshackle houses stretching beside the river which were scarcely
distinguishable from each other in height and coloring. He had just finished a letter to
an old friend of his who was now living abroad, had put it into its envelope in a slow
and dreamy fashion, and with his elbows propped on the writing table was gazing out
of the window at the river, the bridge, and the hills on the farther bank with their
tender green.
 He was thinking about his friend, who had actually run away to Russia some
years before, being dissatisfied with his prospects at home. Now he was carrying on a
business in St. Petersburg, which had flourished to begin with but had long been going
downhill, as he always complained on his increasingly rare visits. So he was wearing
himself out to no purpose in a foreign country, the unfamiliar full beard he wore did
not quite conceal the face Georg had known so well since childhood, and his skin was
growing so yellow as to indicate some latent disease. By his own account he had no
regular connection with the colony of his fellow countrymen out there and almost no
social intercourse with Russian families, so that he was resigning himself to becoming
a permanent bachelor.
 What could one write to such a man, who had obviously run off the rails, a man
one could be sorry for but could not help. Should one advise him to come home, to
transplant himself and take up his old friendships again -- there was nothing to hinder
$ 101
him -- and in general to rely on the help of his friends? But that was as good as telling
him, and the more kindly the more offensively, that all his efforts hitherto had
miscarried, that he should finally give up, come back home, and be gaped at by
everyone as a returned prodigal, that only his friends knew what was what and that he
himself was just a big child who should do what his successful and home-keeping
friends prescribed. And was it certain, besides, that all the pain one would have to
inflict on him would achieve its object? Perhaps it would not even be possible to get
him to come home at all -- he said himself that he was now out of touch with
commerce in his native country -- and then he would still be left an alien in a foreign
land embittered by his friends' advice and more than ever estranged from them. But if
he did follow their advice and then didn't fit in at home -- not out of malice, of course,
but through force of circumstances -- couldn't get on with his friends or without them,
felt humiliated, couldn't be said to have either friends or a country of his own any
longer, wouldn't it have been better for him to stay abroad just as he was? Taking all
this into account, how could one be sure that he would make a success of life at home?
 For such reasons, supposing one wanted to keep up correspondence with him,
one could not send him any real news such as could frankly be told to the most distant
acquaintance. It was more than three years since his last visit, and for this he offered
the lame excuse that the political situation in Russia was too uncertain, which
apparently would not permit even the briefest absence of a small businessman while it
allowed hundreds of thousands of Russians to travel peacefully abroad. But during
these three years Georg's own position in life had changed a lot. TWO years ago his
mother had died, since when he and his father had shared the household together, and
his friend had of course been informed of that and had expressed his sympathy in a
letter phrased so dryly that the grief caused by such an event, one had to conclude,
could not be realized in a distant country. Since that time, however, Georg had applied
himself with greater determination to the business as well as to everything else.
 Perhaps during his mother's lifetime his father's insistence on having
$ 102
everything his own way in the business had hindered him from developing any real
activity of his own, perhaps since her death his father had become less aggressive,
although he was still active in the business, perhaps it was mostly due to an accidental
run of good fortune -- which was very probable indeed -- but at any rate during those
two years the business had developed in a most unexpected way, the staff had had to
be doubled, the turnover was five times as great; no doubt about it, further progress
lay just ahead.
 But Georg's friend had no inkling of this improvement. In earlier years, perhaps
for the last time in that letter of condolence, he had tried to persuade Georg to
emigrate to Russia and had enlarged upon the prospects of success for precisely
Georg's branch of trade. The figures quoted were microscopic by comparison with the
range of Georg's present operations. Yet he shrank from letting his friend know about
his business success, and if he were to do it now retrospectively that certainly would
look peculiar.
 So Georg confined himself to giving his friend unimportant items of gossip
such as rise at random in the memory when one is idly thinking things over on a quiet
Sunday. All he desired was to leave undisturbed the idea of the home town which his
friend must have built up to his own content during the long interval. And so it
happened to Georg that three times in three fairly widely separated letters he had told
his friend about the engagement of an unimportant man to an equally unimportant
girl, until indeed, quite contrary to his intentions, his friend began to show some
interest in this notable event.
 Yet Georg preferred to write about things like these rather than to confess that
he himself had got engaged a month ago to a Fräulein Frieda Brandenfeld, a girl from a
well-to-do family. He often discussed this friend of his with his fiancée and the
peculiar relationship that had developed between them in their correspondence. "So
he won't be coming to our wedding," said she, "and yet I have a right to get to know all
$ 103
your friends." "I don't want to trouble him," answered Georg, "don't misunderstand
me, he would probably come, at least I think so, but he would feel that his hand had
been forced and he would be hurt, perhaps he would envy me and certainly he'd be
discontented and without being able to do anything about his discontent he'd have to
go away again alone. Alone -- do you know what that means?" "Yes, but may he not
hear about our wedding in some other fashion?" "I can't prevent that, of course, but it's
unlikely, considering the way he lives." "Since your friends are like that, Georg, you
shouldn't ever have got engaged at all." "Well, we're both to blame for that; but I
wouldn't have it any other way now." And when, breathing quickly under his kisses,
she still brought out: "All the same, I do feel upset," he thought it could not really
involve him in trouble were he to send the news to his friend. "That's the kind of man I
am and he'll just have to take me as I am," he said to himself, "I can't cut myself to
another pattern that might make a more suitable friend for him."
 And in fact he did inform his friend, in the long letter he had been writing that
Sunday morning, about his engagement, with these words: "I have saved my best news
to the end. I have got engaged to a Fräulein Frieda Brandenfeld, a girl from a well-todo family, who only came to live here a long time after you went away, so that you're
hardly likely to know her. There will be time to tell you more about her later, for today
let me just say that I am very happy and as between you and me the only difference in
our relationship is that instead of a quite ordinary kind of friend you will now have in
me a happy friend. Besides that, you will acquire in my fiancée, who sends her warm
greetings and will soon write you herself, a genuine friend of the opposite sex, which is
not without importance to a bachelor. I know that there are many reasons why you
can't come to see us, but would not my wedding be precisely the right occasion for
giving all obstacles the go-by? Still, however that may be, do just as seems good to you
without regarding any interests but your own."
 With this letter in his hand Georg had been sitting a long time at the writing
table, his face turned toward the window. He had barely acknowledged, with an absent
$ 104
smile, a greeting waved to him from the street by a passing acquaintance.
 At last he put the letter in his pocket and went out of his room across a small
lobby into his father's room, which he had not entered for months. There was in fact
no need for him to enter it, since he saw his father daily at business and they took their
mid-day meal together at an eating house; in the evening, it was true, each did as he
pleased, yet even then, unless Georg -- as mostly happened -- went out with friends or,
more recently, visited his fiancée, they always sat for a while, each with his newspaper,
in their common sitting room.
 It surprised Georg how dark his father's room was even on this sunny morning.
So it was overshadowed as much as that by the high wall on the other side of the
narrow courtyard. His father was sitting by the window in a corner hung with various
mementoes of Georg's dead mother, reading a newspaper which he held to one side
before his eyes in an attempt to overcome a defect of vision. On the table stood the
remains of his breakfast, not much of which seemed to have been eaten.
 "Ah, Georg," said his father, rising at once to meet him. His heavy dressing
gown swung open as he walked and the skirts of it fluttered around him. -- "My father
is still a giant of a man," said Georg to himself.
 "It's unbearably dark here," he said aloud.
 "Yes, it's dark enough," answered his father.
 "And you've shut the window, too?"
 "I prefer it like that."
 "Well, it's quite warm outside," said Georg, as if continuing his previous
remark, and sat down.
$ 105
 His father cleared away the breakfast dishes and set them on a chest.
 "I really only wanted to tell you," went on Georg, who had been vacantly
following the old man's movements, "that I am now sending the news of my
engagement to St. Petersburg." He drew the letter a little way from his pocket and let it
drop back again.
 "To St. Petersburg?" asked his father.
 "To my friend there," said Georg, trying to meet his father's eye. -- In business
hours he's quite different, he was thinking, how solidly he sits here with his arms
crossed.
 "Oh yes. To your friend," said his father, with peculiar emphasis.
 "Well, you know, Father, that I wanted not to tell him about my engagement at
first. Out of consideration for him, that was the only reason. You know yourself he's a
difficult man. I said to myself that someone else might tell him about my engagement,
although he's such a solitary creature that that was hardly likely -- I couldn't prevent
that -- but I wasn't ever going to tell him myself."
 "And now you've changed your mind?" asked his father, laying his enormous
newspaper on the window sill and on top of it his spectacles, which he covered with
one hand.
 "Yes, I've been thinking it over. If he's a good friend of mine, I said to myself,
my being happily engaged should make him happy too. And so I wouldn't put off
telling him any longer. But before I posted the letter I wanted to let you know."
 "Georg," said his father, lengthening his toothless mouth, "listen to me! You've
come to me about this business, to talk it over with me. No doubt that does you honor.
$ 106
But it's nothing, it's worse than nothing, if you don't tell me the whole truth. I don't
want to stir up matters that shouldn't be mentioned here. Since the death of our dear
mother certain things have been done that aren't right. Maybe the time will come for
mentioning them, and maybe sooner than we think. There's many a thing in the
business I'm not aware of, maybe it's not done behind my back -- I'm not going to say
that it's done behind my back -- I'm not equal to things any longer, my memory's
failing, I haven't an eye for so many things any longer. That's the course of nature in
the first place, and in the second place the death of our dear mother hit me harder
than it did you. -- But since we're talking about it, about this letter, I beg you, Georg,
don't deceive me. It's a trivial affair, it's hardly worth mentioning, so don't deceive me.
Do you really have this friend in St. Petersburg?"
 Georg rose in embarrassment. "Never mind my friends. A thousand friends
wouldn't make up to me for my father. Do you know what I think? You're not taking
enough care of yourself. But old age must be taken care of. I can't do without you in
the business, you know that very well, but if the business is going to undermine your
health, I'm ready to close it down tomorrow forever. And that won't do. We'll have to
make a change in your way of living. But a radical change. You sit here in the dark, and
in the sitting room you would have plenty of light. You just take a bite of breakfast
instead of properly keeping up your strength. You sit by a closed window, and the air
would be so good for you. No, Father! I'll get the doctor to come, and we'll follow his
orders. We'll change your room, you can move into the front room and I'll move in
here. You won't notice the change, all your things will be moved with you. But there's
time for all that later, I'll put you to bed now for a little, I'm sure you need to rest.
Come, I'll help you to take off your things, you'll see I can do it. Or if you would rather
go into the front room at once, you can lie down in my bed for the present. That
would be the most sensible thing."
 Georg stood close beside his father, who had let his head with its unkempt
white hair sink on his chest.
$ 107
 "Georg," said his father in a low voice, without moving.
 Georg knelt down at once beside his father, in the old man's weary face he saw
the pupils, overlarge, fixedly looking at him from the corners of the eyes.
 "You have no friend in St. Petersburg. You've always been a leg-puller and you
haven't even shrunk from pulling my leg. How could you have a friend out there! I
can't believe it."
 "Just think back a bit, Father," said Georg, lifting his father from the chair and
slipping off his dressing gown as he stood feebly enough, "it'll soon be three years since
my friend came to see us last. I remember that you used not to like him very much. At
least twice I kept you from seeing him, although he was actually sitting with me in my
room. I could quite well understand your dislike of him, my friend has his peculiarities.
But then, later, you got on with him very well. I was proud because you listened to him
and nodded and asked him questions. If you think back you're bound to remember. He
used to tell us the most incredible stories of the Russian Revolution. For instance,
when he was on a business trip to Kiev and ran into a riot, and saw a priest on a
balcony who cut a broad cross in blood on the palm of his hand and held the hand up
and appealed to the mob. You've told that story yourself once or twice since."
 Meanwhile Georg had succeeded in lowering his father down again and
carefully taking off the woolen drawers he wore over his linen underpants and his
socks. The not particularly clean appearance of his underwear made him reproach
himself for having been neglectful. It should have certainly been his duty to see that
his father had clean changes of underwear. He had not yet explicitly discussed with his
bride-to-be what arrangements should be made for his father in the future, for they
had both of them silently taken it for granted that the old man would go on living
alone in the old house. But now he made a quick, firm decision to take him into his
own future establishment. It almost looked, on closer inspection, as if the care he
meant to lavish there on his father might come too late.
$ 108
 He carried his father to bed in his arms. It gave him a dreadful feeling to notice
that while he took the few steps toward the bed the old man on his breast was playing
with his watch chain. He could not lay him down on the bed for a moment, so firmly
did he hang on to the watch chain.
 But as soon as he was laid in bed, all seemed well. He covered himself up and
even drew the blankets farther than usual over his shoulders. He looked up at Georg
with a not unfriendly eye.
 "You begin to remember my friend, don't you?" asked Georg, giving him an
encouraging nod.
 "Am I well covered up now?" asked his father, as if he were not able to see
whether his feet were properly tucked in or not.
 "So you find it snug in bed already," said Georg, and tucked the blankets more
closely around him.
 "Am I well covered up?" asked the father once more, seeming to be strangely
intent upon the answer.
 "Don't worry, you're well covered up."
 "No!" cried his father, cutting short the answer, threw the blankets off with a
strength that sent them all flying in a moment and sprang erect in bed. Only one hand
lightly touched the ceiling to steady him.
 "You wanted to cover me up, I know, my young sprig, but I'm far from being
covered up yet. And even if this is the last strength I have, it's enough for you, too
much for you. Of course I know your friend. He would have been a son after my own
heart. That's why you've been playing him false all these years. Why else? Do you think
$ 109
I haven't been sorry for him? And that's why you had to lock yourself up in your office
-- the Chief is busy, mustn't be disturbed -- just so that you could write your lying little
letters to Russia. But thank goodness a father doesn't need to be taught how to see
through his son. And now that you thought you'd got him down, so far down that you
could set your bottom on him and sit on him and he wouldn't move, then my fine son
makes up his mind to get married!"
 Georg stared at the bogey conjured up by his father. His friend in St.
Petersburg, whom his father suddenly knew too well, touched his imagination as never
before. Lost in the vastness of Russia he saw him. At the door of an empty, plundered
warehouse he saw him. Among the wreckage of his showcases, the slashed remnants
of his wares, the falling gas brackets, he was just standing up. Why did he have to go so
far away!
 "But attend to me!" cried his father, and Georg, almost distracted, ran toward
the bed to take everything in, yet came to a stop halfway.
 "Because she lifted up her skirts," his father began to flute, "because she lifted
her skirts like this, the nasty creature," and mimicking her he lifted his shirt so high
that one could see the scar on his thigh from his war wound, "because she lifted her
skirts like this and this you made up to her, and in order to make free with her
undisturbed you have disgraced your mother's memory, betrayed your friend, and
stuck your father into bed so that he can't move. But he can move, or can't he?"
 And he stood up quite unsupported and kicked his legs out. His insight made
him radiant.
 Georg shrank into a corner, as far away from his father as possible. A long time
ago he had firmly made up his mind to watch closely every least movement so that he
should not be surprised by any indirect attack, a pounce from behind or above. At this
moment he recalled this long-forgotten resolve and forgot it again, like a man drawing
$ 110
a short thread through the eye of a needle.
 "But your friend hasn't been betrayed after all!" cried his father, emphasizing
the point with stabs of his forefinger. "I've been representing him here on the spot."
 "You comedian!" Georg could not resist the retort, realized at once the harm
done and, his eyes starting in his head, bit his tongue back, only too late, till the pain
made his knees give.
 "Yes, of course I've been playing a comedy! A comedy! That's a good
expression! What other comfort was left to a poor old widower? Tell me -- and while
you're answering me be you still my living son -- what else was left to me, in my back
room, plagued by a disloyal staff, old to the marrow of my bones? And my son
strutting through the world, finishing off deals that I had prepared for him, bursting
with triumphant glee, and stalking away from his father with the closed face of a
respectable businessman! Do you think I didn't love you, I, from whom you are
sprung?"
 Now he'll lean forward, thought Georg, what if he topples and smashes himself!
These words went hissing through his mind.
 His father leaned forward but did not topple. Since Georg did not come any
nearer, as he had expected, he straightened himself again.
 "Stay where you are, I don't need you! You think you have strength enough to
come over here and that you're only hanging back of your own accord. Don't be too
sure! I am still much the stronger of us two. All by myself I might have had to give way,
but your mother has given me so much of her strength that I've established a fine
connection with your friend and I have your customers here in my pocket!"
 "He has pockets even in his shirt!" said Georg to himself, and believed that with
$ 111
this remark he could make him an impossible figure for all the world. Only for a
moment did he think so, since he kept on forgetting everything.
 "Just take your bride on your arm and try getting in my way! I'll sweep her from
your very side, you don't know how!"
 Georg made a grimace of disbelief. His father only nodded, confirming the
truth of his words, toward Georg's corner.
 "How you amused me today, coming to ask me if you should tell your friend
about your engagement. He knows it already, you stupid boy, he knows it all! I've been
writing to him, for you forgot to take my writing things away from me. That's why he
hasn't been here for years, he knows everything a hundred times better than you do
yourself, in his left hand he crumples your letters unopened while in his right hand he
holds up my letters to read through!"
 In his enthusiasm he waved his arm over his head. "He knows everything a
thousand times better!" he cried.
 "Ten thousand times!" said Georg, to make fun of his father, but in his very
mouth the words turned into deadly earnest.
 "For years I've been waiting for you to come with some such question! Do you
think I concern myself with anything else? Do you think I read my newspapers? Look!"
and he threw Georg a newspaper sheet which he had somehow taken to bed with him.
An old newspaper, with a name entirely unknown to Georg.
 "How long a time you've taken to grow up! Your mother had to die, she
couldn't see the happy day, your friend is going to pieces in Russia, even three years
ago he was yellow enough to be thrown away, and as for me, you see what condition
I'm in. You have eyes in your head for that!"
$ 112
 "So you've been lying in wait for me!" cried Georg.
 His father said pityingly, in an offhand manner: "I suppose you wanted to say
that sooner. But now it doesn't matter." And in a louder voice: "So now you know what
else there was in the world besides yourself, till now you've known only about yourself!
An innocent child, yes, that you were, truly, but still more truly have you been a
devilish human being! -- And therefore take note: I sentence you now to death by
drowning!"
 Georg felt himself urged from the room, the crash with which his father fell on
the bed behind him was still in his ears as he fled. On the staircase, which he rushed
down as if its steps were an inclined plane, he ran into his charwoman on her way up
to do the morning cleaning of the room. "Jesus!" she cried, and covered her face with
her apron, but he was already gone. Out of the front door he rushed, across the
roadway, driven toward the water. Already he was grasping at the railings as a starving
man clutches food. He swung himself over, like the distinguished gymnast he had once
been in his youth, to his parents' pride. With weakening grip he was still holding on
when he spied between the railings a motor-bus coming which would easily cover the
noise of his fall, called in a low voice: "Dear parents, I have always loved you, all the
same," and let himself drop.
 At this moment an unending stream of traffic was just going over the bridge.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 113
The Metamorphosis
I
 As GREGOR SAMSA awoke one morning from uneasy dreams he found himself
transformed in his bed into a gigantic insect. He was lying on his hard, as it were
armor-plated, back and when he lifted his head a little he could see his domelike
brown belly divided into stiff arched segments on top of which the bed quilt could
hardly keep in position and was about to slide off completely. His numerous legs,
which were pitifully thin compared to the rest of his bulk, waved helplessly before his
eyes.
 What has happened to me? he thought. It was no dream. His room, a regular
human bedroom, only rather too small, lay quiet between the four familiar walls.
Above the table on which a collection of cloth samples was unpacked and spread out -
- Samsa was a commercial traveler -- hung the picture which he had recently cut out
of an illustrated magazine and put into a pretty gilt frame. It showed a lady, with a fur
cap on and a fur stole, sitting upright and holding out to the spectator a huge fur muff
into which the whole of her forearm had vanished!
 Gregor's eyes turned next to the window, and the overcast sky -- one could
$ 114
hear raindrops beating on the window gutter -- made him quite melancholy. What
about sleeping a little longer and forgetting all this nonsense, he thought, but it could
not be done, for he was accustomed to sleep on his right side and in his present
condition he could not turn himself over. However violently he forced himself toward
his right side he always rolled onto his back again. He tried it at least a hundred times,
shutting his eyes to keep from seeing his struggling legs, and only desisted when he
began to feel in his side a faint dull ache he had never experienced before.
 Oh God, he thought, what an exhausting job I've picked on! Traveling about
day in, day out. It's much more irritating work than doing the actual business in the
office, and on top of that there's the trouble of constant traveling, of worrying about
train connections, the bed and irregular meals, casual acquaintances that are always
new and never become intimate friends. The devil take it all! He felt a slight itching up
on his belly; slowly pushed himself on his back nearer to the top of the bed so that he
could lift his head more easily; identified the itching place which was surrounded by
many small white spots the nature of which he could not understand and made to
touch it with a leg, but drew the leg back immediately, for the contact made a cold
shiver run through him.
 He slid down again into his former position. This getting up early, he thought,
makes one quite stupid. A man needs his sleep. Other commercials live like harem
women. For instance, when I come back to the hotel of a morning to write up the
orders I've got, these others are only sitting down to the breakfast. Let me just try that
with my chief; I'd be sacked on the spot. Anyhow, that might be quite a good thing for
me, who can tell? If I didn't have to hold my hand because of my parents I'd have given
notice long ago, I'd have gone to the chief and told him exactly what I think of him.
That would knock him endways from his desk! It's a queer way of doing, too, this
sitting on high at a desk and talking down to employees, especially when they have to
come quite near because the chief is hard of hearing. Well, there's still hope; once I've
saved enough money to pay back my parents' debts to him -- that should take another
$ 115
five or six years -- I'll do it without fail. I'll cut myself completely loose then. For the
moment, though, I'd better get up, since my train goes at five.
 He looked at the alarm clock ticking on the chest. Heavenly Father! he thought.
It was half-past six o'clock and the hands were quietly moving on, it was even past the
half-hour, it was getting on toward a quarter to seven. Had the alarm clock not gone
off? From the bed one could see that it had been properly set for four o'clock; of course
it must have gone off. Yes, but was it possible to sleep quietly through that earsplitting noise? Well, he had not slept quietly, yet apparently all the more soundly for
that. But what was he to do now? The next train went at seven o'clock; to catch that he
would need to hurry like mad and his samples weren't even packed up, and he himself
wasn't feeling particularly fresh and active. And even if he did catch the train he
wouldn't avoid a row with the chief, since the firm's porter would have been waiting
for the five o'clock train and would have long since reported his failure to turn up. The
porter was a creature of the chief's, spineless and stupid. Well, supposing he were to
say he was sick? But that would be most unpleasant and would look suspicious, since
during his five years' employment he had not been ill once. The chief himself would be
sure to come with the sick-insurance doctor, would reproach his parents with their
son's laziness, and would cut all excuses short by referring to the insurance doctor,
who of course regarded all mankind as perfectly healthy malingerers. And would he be
so far wrong on this occasion? Gregor really felt quite well, apart from a drowsiness
that was utterly superfluous after such a long sleep, and he was even unusually hungry.
 As all this was running through his mind at top speed without his being able to
decide to leave his bed -- the alarm clock had just struck a quarter to seven -- there
came a cautious tap at the door behind the head of his bed. "Gregor," said a voice -- it
was his mother's -- "it's a quarter to seven. Hadn't you a train to catch?" That gentle
voice! Gregor had a shock as he heard his own voice answering hers, unmistakably his
own voice, it was true, but with a persistent horrible twittering squeak behind it like an
undertone, which left the words in their clear shape only for the first moment and
$ 116
then rose up reverberating around them to destroy their sense, so that one could not
be sure one had heard them rightly. Gregor wanted to answer at length and explain
everything, but in the circumstances he confined himself to saying: "Yes, yes, thank
you, Mother, I'm getting up now." The wooden door between them must have kept the
change in his voice from being noticeable outside, for his mother contented herself
with this statement and shuffled away. Yet this brief exchange of words had made the
other members of the family aware that Gregor was still in the house, as they had not
expected, and at one of the side doors his father was already knocking, gently, yet with
his fist. "Gregor, Gregor," he called, "What's the matter with you?" And after a little
while he called again in a deeper voice: "Gregor! Gregor!" At the other side door his
sister was saying in a low, plaintive tone: "Gregor? Aren't you well? Are you needing
anything?" He answered them both at once: "I'm just ready," and did his best to make
his voice sound as normal as possible by enunciating the words very clearly and
leaving long pauses between them. So his father went back to his breakfast, but his
sister whispered: "Gregor, open the door, do." However, he was not thinking of
opening the door, and felt thankful for the prudent habit he had acquired in traveling
of locking all doors during the night, even at home.
 His immediate intention was to get up quietly without being disturbed, to put
on his clothes and above all eat his breakfast, and only then consider what else was to
be done, since in bed, he was well aware, his meditations would come to no sensible
conclusion. He remembered that often enough in bed he had felt small aches and
pains, probably caused by awkward postures, which had proved purely imaginary once
he got up, and he looked forward eagerly to seeing this morning's delusions gradually
fall away. That the change in his voice was nothing but the precursor of a severe chill,
a standing ailment of commercial travelers, he had not the least possible doubt.
 To get rid of the quilt was quite easy; he had only to inflate himself a little and
it fell off by itself. But the next move was difficult, especially because he was so
uncommonly broad. He would have needed arms and hands to hoist himself up;
$ 117
instead he had only the numerous little legs which never stopped waving in all
directions and which he could not control in the least. When he tried to bend one of
them it was the first to stretch itself straight; and did he succeed at last in making it do
what he wanted, all the other legs meanwhile waved the more wildly in a high degree
of unpleasant agitation. "But what's the use of lying idle in bed," said Gregor to himself.
 He thought that he might get out of bed with the lower part of his body first,
but this lower part, which he had not yet seen and of which he could form no clear
conception, proved too difficult to move; it shifted so slowly; and when finally, almost
wild with annoyance, he gathered his forces together and thrust out recklessly, he had
miscalculated the direction and bumped heavily against the lower end of the bed, and
the stinging pain he felt informed him that precisely this lower part of his body was at
the moment probably the most sensitive.
 So he tried to get the top part of himself out first, and cautiously moved his
head toward the edge of the bed. That proved easy enough, and despite its breadth and
mass the bulk of his body at last slowly followed the movement of his head. Still, when
he finally got his head free over the edge of the bed he felt too scared to go on
advancing, for after all if he let himself fall in this way it would take a miracle to keep
his head from being injured. And at all costs he must not lose consciousness now,
precisely now; he would rather stay in bed.
 But when after a repetition of the same efforts he lay in his former position
again, sighing, and watched his little legs struggling against each other more wildly
than ever, if that were possible, and saw no way of bringing any order into this
arbitrary confusion, he told himself again that it was impossible to stay in bed and that
the most sensible course was to risk everything for the smallest hope of getting away
from it. At the same time he did not forget to remind himself occasionally that cool
reflection, the coolest possible, was much better than desperate resolves. In such
moments he focused his eyes as sharply as possible on the window, but, unfortunately,
$ 118
the prospect of the morning fog, which muffled even the other side of the narrow
street, brought him little encouragement and comfort. "Seven o'clock already," he said
to himself when the alarm clock chimed again, "seven o'clock already and still such a
thick fog." And for a little while he lay quiet, breathing lightly, as if perhaps expecting
such complete repose to restore all things to their real and normal condition.
 But then he said to himself: "Before it strikes a quarter past seven I must be
quite out of this bed, without fail. Anyhow, by that time someone will have come from
the office to ask for me, since it opens before seven." And he set himself to rocking his
whole body at once in a regular rhythm, with the idea of swinging it out of the bed. If
he tipped himself out in that way he could keep his head from injury by lifting it at an
acute angle when he fell. His back seemed to be hard and was not likely to suffer from
a fall on the carpet. His biggest worry was the loud crash he would not be able to help
making, which would probably cause anxiety, if not terror, behind all the doors. Still,
he must take the risk.
 When he was already half out of the bed -- the new method was more a game
than an effort, for he needed only to hitch himself across by rocking to and fro -- it
struck him how simple it would be if he could get help. Two strong people -- he
thought of his father and the servant girl -- would be amply sufficient; they would only
have to thrust their arms under his convex back, lever him out of the bed, bend down
with their burden, and then be patient enough to let him turn himself right over onto
the floor, where it was to be hoped his legs would then find their proper function.
Well, ignoring the fact that the doors were all locked, ought he really to call for help?
In spite of his misery he could not suppress a smile at the very idea of it.
 He had got so far that he could barely keep his equilibrium when he rocked
himself strongly, and he would have to nerve himself very soon for the final decision
since in five minutes' time it would be quarter past seven -- when the front doorbell
rang. "That's someone from the office," he said to himself, and grew almost rigid, while
$ 119
his little legs only jigged about all the faster. For a moment everything stayed quiet.
"They're not going to open the door," said Gregor to himself, catching at some kind of
irrational hope. But then of course the servant girl went as usual to the door with her
heavy tread and opened it. Gregor needed only to hear the first good morning of the
visitor to know immediately who it was -- the chief clerk himself. What a fate, to be
condemned to work for a firm where the smallest omission at once gave rise to the
gravest suspicion! Were all employees in a body nothing but scoundrels, was there not
among them one single loyal devoted man who, had he wasted only an hour or so of
the firm's time in a morning, was so tormented by conscience as to be driven out of his
mind and actually incapable of leaving his bed? Wouldn't it really have been sufficient
to send an apprentice to inquire -- if any inquiry were necessary at all -- did the chief
clerk himself have to come and thus indicate to the entire family, an innocent family,
that this suspicious circumstance could be investigated by no one less versed in affairs
than himself? And more through the agitation caused by these reflections than
through any act of will Gregor swung himself out of bed with all his strength. There
was a loud thump, but it was not really a crash. His fall was broken to some extent by
the carpet, his back, too, was less stiff than he thought, and so there was merely a dull
thud, not so very startling. Only he had not lifted his head carefully enough and had
hit it; he turned it and rubbed it on the carpet in pain and irritation.
 "That was something falling down in there," said the chief clerk in the next
room to the left. Gregor tried to suppose to himself that something like what had
happened to him today might someday happen to the chief clerk; one really could not
deny that it was possible. But as if in brusque reply to this supposition the chief clerk
took a couple of firm steps in the next-door room and his patent leather boots
creaked. From the right-hand room his sister was whispering to inform him of the
situation: "Gregor, the chief clerk's here." "I know," muttered Gregor to himself; but he
didn't dare to make his voice loud enough for his sister to hear it.
 "Gregor," said his father now from the left-hand room, "the chief clerk has
$ 120
come and wants to know why you didn't catch the early train. We don't know what to
say to him. Besides, he wants to talk to you in person. So open the door, please. He will
be good enough to excuse the untidiness of your room." "Good morning, Mr. Samsa,"
the chief clerk was calling amiably meanwhile. "He's not well," said his mother to the
visitor, while his father was still speaking through the door, "he's not well, sir, believe
me. What else would make him miss a train! The boy thinks about nothing but his
work. It makes me almost cross the way he never goes out in the evenings; he's been
here the last eight days and has stayed at home every single evening. He just sits there
quietly at the table reading a newspaper or looking through railway timetables. The
only amusement he gets is doing fretwork. For instance, he spent two or three
evenings cutting out a little picture frame; you would be surprised to see how pretty it
is; it's hanging in his room; you'll see it in a minute when Gregor opens the door. I
must say I'm glad you've come, sir; we should never have got him to unlock the door
by ourselves; he's so obstinate; and I'm sure he's unwell, though he wouldn't have it to
be so this morning." "I'm just coming," said Gregor slowly and carefully, not moving an
inch for fear of losing one word of the conversation. "I can't think of any other
explanation, madame," said the chief clerk, "I hope it's nothing serious. Although on
the other hand I must say that we men of business -- fortunately or unfortunately --
very often simply have to ignore any slight indisposition, since business must be
attended to." "Well, can the chief clerk come in now?" asked Gregor's father
impatiently, again knocking on the door. "No," said Gregor. In the left-hand room a
painful silence followed this refusal, in the right-hand room his sister began to sob.
 Why didn't his sister join the others? She was probably newly out of bed and
hadn't even begun to put on her clothes yet. Well, why was she crying? Because he
wouldn't get up and let the chief clerk in, because he was in danger of losing his job,
and because the chief would begin dunning his parents again for the old debts? Surely
these were things one didn't need to worry about for the present. Gregor was still at
home and not in the least thinking of deserting the family. At the moment, true, he
was lying on the carpet and no one who knew the condition he was in could seriously
$ 121
expect him to admit the chief clerk. But for such a small discourtesy, which could
plausibly be explained away somehow later on, Gregor could hardly be dismissed on
the spot. And it seemed to Gregor that it would be much more sensible to leave him in
peace for the present than to trouble him with tears and entreaties. Still, of course,
their uncertainty bewildered them all and excused their behavior.
 "Mr. Samsa," the chief clerk called now in a louder voice, "what's the matter
with you? Here you are, barricading yourself in your room, giving only 'yes' and 'no' for
answers, causing your parents a lot of unnecessary trouble and neglecting -- I mention
this only in passing -- neglecting your business duties in an incredible fashion. I am
speaking here in the name of your parents and of your chief, and I beg you quite
seriously to give me an immediate and precise explanation. You amaze me, you amaze
me. I thought you were a quiet, dependable person, and now all at once you seem bent
on making a disgraceful exhibition of yourself. The chief did hint to me early this
morning a possible explanation for your disappearance -- with reference to the cash
payments that were entrusted to you recently -- but I almost pledged my solemn word
of honor that this could not be so. But now that I see how incredibly obstinate you are,
I no longer have the slightest desire to take your part at all. And your position in the
firm is not so unassailable. I came with the intention of telling you all this in private,
but since you are wasting my time so needlessly I don't see why your parents shouldn't
hear it too. For some time past your work has been most unsatisfactory; this is not the
season of the year for a business boom, of course, we admit that, but a season of the
year for doing no business at all, that does not exist, Mr. Samsa, must not exist."
 "But, sir," cried Gregor, beside himself and in his agitation forgetting everything
else, "I'm just going to open the door this very minute. A slight illness, an attack of
giddiness, has kept me from getting up. I'm still lying in bed. But I feel all right again.
I'm getting out of bed now. Just give me a moment or two longer! I'm not quite so well
as I thought. But I'm all right, really. How a thing like that can suddenly strike one
down! Only last night I was quite well, my parents can tell you, or rather I did have a
$ 122
slight presentiment. I must have showed some sign of it. Why didn't I report it at the
office! But one always thinks that an indisposition can be got over without staying in
the house. Oh sir, do spare my parents! All that you're reproaching me with now has
no foundation; no one has ever said a word to me about it. Perhaps you haven't looked
at the last orders I sent in. Anyhow, I can still catch the eight o'clock train, I'm much
the better for my few hours' rest. Don't let me detain you here, sir; I'll be attending to
business very soon, and do be good enough to tell the chief so and to make my excuses
to him!"
 And while all this was tumbling out pell-mell and Gregor hardly knew what he
was saying, he had reached the chest quite easily, perhaps because of the practice he
had had in bed, and was now trying to lever himself upright by means of it. He meant
actually to open the door, actually to show himself and speak to the chief clerk; he was
eager to find out what the others, after all their insistence, would say at the sight of
him. If they were horrified then the responsibility was no longer his and he could stay
quiet. But if they took it calmly, then he had no reason either to be upset, and could
really get to the station for the eight o'clock train if he hurried. At first he slipped
down a few times from the polished surface of the chest, but at length with a last heave
he stood upright; he paid no more attention to the pains in the lower part of his body,
however they smarted. Then he let himself fall against the back of a nearby chair, and
clung with his little legs to the edges of it. That brought him into control of himself
again and he stopped speaking, for now he could listen to what the chief clerk was
saying.
 "Did you understand a word of it?" the chief clerk was asking; "surely he can't
be trying to make fools of us?" "Oh dear," cried his mother, in tears, "perhaps he's
terribly ill and we're tormenting him. Grete! Grete!" she called out then. "Yes Mother?"
called his sister from the other side. They were calling to each other across Gregor's
room. "You must go this minute for the doctor. Gregor is ill. Go for the doctor, quick.
Did you hear how he was speaking?" "That was no human voice," said the chief clerk in
$ 123
a voice noticeably low beside the shrillness of the mother's. "Anna! Anna!" his father
was calling through the hall to the kitchen, clapping his hands, "get a locksmith at
once!" And the two girls were already running through the hall with a swish of skirts --
how could his sister have got dressed so quickly? -- and were tearing the front door
open. There was no sound of its closing again; they had evidently left it open, as one
does in houses where some great misfortune has happened.
 But Gregor was now much calmer. The words he uttered were no longer
understandable, apparently, although they seemed clear enough to him, even clearer
than before, perhaps because his ear had grown accustomed to the sound of them. Yet
at any rate people now believed that something was wrong with him, and were ready
to help him. The positive certainty with which these first measures had been taken
comforted him. He felt himself drawn once more into the human circle and hoped for
great and remarkable results from both the doctor and the locksmith, without really
distinguishing precisely between them. To make his voice as clear as possible for the
decisive conversation that was now imminent he coughed a little, as quietly as he
could, of course, since this noise too might not sound like a human cough for all he
was able to judge. In the next room meanwhile there was complete silence. Perhaps his
parents were sitting at the table with the chief clerk, whispering, perhaps they were all
leaning against the door and listening.
 Slowly Gregor pushed the chair toward the door, then let go of it, caught hold
of the door for support -- the soles at the end of his little legs were somewhat sticky --
and rested against it for a moment after his efforts. Then he set himself to turning the
key in the lock with his mouth. It seemed, unhappily, that he hadn't really any teeth --
what could he grip the key with? -- but on the other hand his jaws were certainly very
strong; with their help he did manage to set the key in motion, heedless of the fact that
he was undoubtedly damaging them somewhere, since a brown fluid issued from his
mouth, flowed over the key, and dripped on the floor. "Just listen to that," said the
chief clerk next door; "he's turning the key." That was a great encouragement to
$ 124
Gregor; but they should all have shouted encouragement to him, his father and
mother too: "Go on, Gregor," they should have called out, "keep going, hold on to that
key!" And in the belief that they were all following his efforts intently, he clenched his
jaws recklessly on the key with all the force at his command. As the turning of the key
progressed he circled around the lock, holding on now only with his mouth, pushing
on the key, as required, or pulling it down again with all the weight of his body. The
louder click of the finally yielding lock literally quickened Gregor. With a deep breath
of relief he said to himself: "So I didn't need the locksmith," and laid his head on the
handle to open the door wide.
 Since he had to pull the door toward him, he was still invisible when it was
really wide open. He had to edge himself slowly around the near half of the double
door, and to do it very carefully if he was not to fall plump upon his back just on the
threshold. He was still carrying out this difficult maneuver, with no time to observe
anything else, when he heard the chief clerk utter a loud "Oh!" -- it sounded like a gust
of wind -- and now he could see the man, standing as he was nearest to the door,
clapping one hand before his open mouth and slowly backing away as if driven by
some invisible steady pressure. His mother -- in spite of the chief clerk's being there
her hair was still undone and sticking up in all directions -- first clasped her hands and
looked at his father, then took two steps toward Gregor and fell on the floor among
her outspread skirts, her face quite hidden on her breast. His father knotted his fist
with a fierce expression on his face as if he meant to knock Gregor back into his room,
then looked uncertainly around the living room, covered his eyes with his hands, and
wept till his great chest heaved.
 Gregor did not go now into the living room, but leaned against the inside of the
firmly shut wing of the door, so that only half his body was visible and his head above
it bending sideways to look at the others. The light had meanwhile strengthened; on
the other side of the street one could see clearly a section of the endlessly long, dark
gray building opposite -- it was a hospital -- abruptly punctuated by its row of regular
$ 125
windows; the rain was still falling, but only in large singly discernible and literally
singly splashing drops. The breakfast dishes were set out on the table lavishly, for
breakfast was the most important meal of the day to Gregor's father, who lingered it
out for hours over various newspapers. Right opposite Gregor on the wall hung a
photograph of himself in military service, as a lieutenant, hand on sword, a carefree
smile on his face, inviting one to respect his uniform and military bearing. The door
leading to the hall was open, and one could see that the front door stood open too,
showing the landing beyond and the beginning of the stairs going down.
 "Well," said Gregor, knowing perfectly that he was the only one who had
retained any composure, "I'll put my clothes on at once, pack up my samples, and start
off. Will you only let me go? You see, sir, I'm not obstinate, and I'm willing to work;
traveling is a hard life, but I couldn't live without it. Where are you going, sir? To the
office? Yes? Will you give a true account of all this? One can be temporarily
incapacitated, but that's just the moment for remembering former services and
bearing in mind that later on, when the incapacity has been got over, one will certainly
work with all the more industry and concentration. I'm loyally bound to serve the
chief, you know that very well. Besides, I have to provide for my parents and my sister.
I'm in great difficulties, but I'll get out of them again. Don't make things any worse for
me than they are. Stand up for me in the firm. Travelers are not popular there, I know.
People think they earn sacks of money and just have a good time. A prejudice there's
no particular reason for revising. But you, sir, have a more comprehensive view of
affairs than the rest of the staff, yes, let me tell you in confidence, a more
comprehensive view than the chief himself, who, being the owner, lets his judgment
easily be swayed against one of his employees. And you know very well that the
traveler, who is never seen in the office almost the whole year around, can so easily fall
a victim to gossip and ill luck and unfounded complaints, which he mostly knows
nothing about, except when he comes back exhausted from his rounds, and only then
suffers in person from their evil consequences, which he can no longer trace back to
the original causes. Sir, sir, don't go away without a word to me to show that you think
$ 126
me in the right at least to some extent!"
 But at Gregor's very first words the chief clerk had already backed away and
only stared at him with parted lips over one twitching shoulder. And while Gregor was
speaking he did not stand still one moment but stole away toward the door, without
taking his eyes off Gregor, yet only an inch at a time, as if obeying some secret
injunction to leave the room. He was already at the hall, and the suddenness with
which he took his last step out of the living room would have made one believe he had
burned the sole of his foot. Once in the hall he stretched his right arm before him
toward the staircase, as if some supernatural power were waiting there to deliver him.
 Gregor perceived that the chief clerk must on no account be allowed to go
away in this frame of mind if his position in the firm were not to be endangered to the
utmost. His parents did not understand this so well; they had convinced themselves in
the course of years that Gregor was settled for life in this firm, and besides they were
so preoccupied with their immediate troubles that all foresight had forsaken them. Yet
Gregor had this foresight. The chief clerk must be detained, soothed, persuaded, and
finally won over; the whole future of Gregor and his family depended on it! If only his
sister had been there! She was intelligent; she had begun to cry while Gregor was still
lying quietly on his back. And no doubt the chief clerk, so partial to ladies, would have
been guided by her; she would have shut the door of the flat and in the hall talked him
out of his horror. But she was not there, and Gregor would have to handle the
situation himself. And without remembering that he was still unaware what powers of
movement he possessed, without even remembering that his words in all possibility,
indeed in all likelihood, would again be unintelligible, he let go the wing of the door,
pushed himself through the opening, started to walk toward the chief clerk, who was
already ridiculously clinging with both hands to the railing on the landing; but
immediately, as he was feeling for a support, he fell down with a little cry upon all his
numerous legs. Hardly was he down when he experienced for the first time this
morning a sense of physical comfort; his legs had firm ground under them; they were
$ 127
completely obedient, as he noted with joy; they even strove to carry him forward in
whatever direction he chose; and he was inclined to believe that a final relief from all
his sufferings was at hand. But in the same moment as he found himself on the floor,
rocking with suppressed eagerness to move, not far from his mother, indeed just in
front of her, she, who had seemed so completely crushed, sprang all at once to her feet,
her arms and fingers outspread, cried: "Help, for God's sake, help!" bent her head down
as if to see Gregor better, yet on the contrary kept backing senselessly away; had quite
forgotten that the laden table stood behind her; sat upon it hastily, as if in absence of
mind, when she bumped into it; and seemed altogether unaware that the big coffeepot
beside her was upset and pouring coffee in a flood over the carpet.
 "Mother, Mother," said Gregor in a low voice, and looked up at her. The chief
clerk, for the moment, had quite slipped from his mind; instead, he could not resist
snapping his jaws together at the sight of the streaming coffee. That made his mother
scream again, she fled from the table and fell into the arms of his father, who hastened
to catch her. But Gregor had now no time to spare for his parents; the chief clerk was
already on the stairs; with his chin on the banisters he was taking one last backward
look. Gregor made a spring, to be as sure as possible of overtaking him; the chief clerk
must have divined his intention, for he leaped down several steps and vanished; he was
still yelling "Ugh!" and it echoed through the whole staircase.
 Unfortunately, the flight of the chief clerk seemed completely to upset Gregor's
father, who had remained relatively calm until now, for instead of running after the
man himself, or at least not hindering Gregor in his pursuit, he seized in his right hand
the walking stick that the chief clerk had left behind on a chair, together with a hat and
greatcoat, snatched in his left hand a large newspaper from the table, and began
stamping his feet and flourishing the stick and the newspaper to drive Gregor back
into his room. No entreaty of Gregor's availed, indeed no entreaty was even
understood, however humbly he bent his head his father only stamped on the floor the
more loudly. Behind his father his mother had torn open a window, despite the cold
$ 128
weather, and was leaning far out of it with her face in her hands. A strong draught set
in from the street to the staircase, the window curtains blew in, the newspapers on the
table fluttered, stray pages whisked over the floor. Pitilessly Gregor's father drove him
back, hissing and crying "Shoo!" like a savage. But Gregor was quite unpracticed in
walking backwards, it really was a slow business. If he only had a chance to turn
around he could get back to his room at once, but he was afraid of exasperating his
father by the slowness of such a rotation and at any moment the stick in his father's
hand might hit him a fatal blow on the back or on the head. In the end, however,
nothing else was left for him to do since to his horror he observed that in moving
backwards he could not even control the direction he took; and so, keeping an anxious
eye on his father all the time over his shoulder, he began to turn around as quickly as
he could, which was in reality very slowly. Perhaps his father noted his good
intentions, for he did not interfere except every now and then to help him in the
maneuver from a distance with the point of the stick. If only he would have stopped
making that unbearable hissing noise! It made Gregor quite lose his head. He had
turned almost completely around when the hissing noise so distracted him that he
even turned a little the wrong way again. But when at last his head was fortunately
right in front of the doorway, it appeared that his body was too broad simply to get
through the opening. His father, of course, in his present mood was far from thinking
of such a thing as opening the other half of the door, to let Gregor have enough space.
He had merely the fixed idea of driving Gregor back into his room as quickly as
possible. He would never have suffered Gregor to make the circumstantial
preparations for standing up on end and perhaps slipping his way through the door.
Maybe he was now making more noise than ever to urge Gregor forward, as if no
obstacle impeded him; to Gregor, anyhow, the noise in his rear sounded no longer like
the voice of one single father; this was really no joke, and Gregor thrust himself --
come what might -- into the doorway. One side of his body rose up, he was tilted at an
angle in the doorway, his flank was quite bruised, horrid blotches stained the white
door, soon he was stuck fast and, left to himself, could not have moved at all, his legs
on one side fluttered trembling in the air, those on the other were crushed painfully to
$ 129
the floor -- when from behind his father gave him a strong push which was literally a
deliverance and he flew far into the room, bleeding freely. The door was slammed
behind him with the stick, and then at last there was silence.
II
 Not until it was twilight did Gregor awake out of a deep sleep, more like a
swoon than a sleep. He would certainly have waked up of his own accord not much
later, for he felt himself sufficiently rested and well slept, but it seemed to him as if a
fleeting step and a cautious shutting of the door leading into the hall had aroused him.
The electric lights in the street cast a pale sheen here and there on the ceiling and the
upper surfaces of the furniture, but down below, where he lay, it was dark. Slowly,
awkwardly trying out his feelers, which he now first learned to appreciate, he pushed
his way to the door to see what had been happening there. His left side felt like one
single long, unpleasantly tense scar, and he had actually to limp on his two rows of
legs. One little leg, moreover, had been severely damaged in the course of that
morning's events -- it was almost a miracle that only one had been damaged -- and
trailed uselessly behind him.
 He had reached the door before he discovered what had really drawn him to it:
the smell of food. For there stood a basin filled with fresh milk in which floated little
sops of white bread. He could almost have laughed with joy, since he was now still
hungrier than in the morning, and he dipped his head almost over the eyes straight
into the milk. But soon in disappointment he withdrew it again; not only did he find it
difficult to feed because of his tender left side -- and he could only feed with the
palpitating collaboration of his whole body -- he did not like the milk either, although
milk had been his favorite drink and that was certainly why his sister had set it there
$ 130
for him, indeed it was almost with repulsion that he turned away from the basin and
crawled back to the middle of the room.
 He could see through the crack of the door that the gas was turned on in the
living room, but while usually at this time his father made a habit of reading the
afternoon newspaper in a loud voice to his mother and occasionally to his sister as
well, not a sound was now to be heard. Well, perhaps his father had recently given up
this habit of reading aloud, which his sister had mentioned so often in conversation
and in her letters. But there was the same silence all around, although the flat was
certainly not empty of occupants. "What a quiet life our family has been leading," said
Gregor to himself, and as he sat there motionless staring into the darkness he felt great
pride in the fact that he had been able to provide such a life for his parents and sister
in such a fine flat. But what if all the quiet, the comfort, the contentment were now to
end in horror? To keep himself from being lost in such thoughts Gregor took refuge in
movement and crawled up and down the room.
 Once during the long evening one of the side doors was opened a little and
quickly shut again, later the other side door too; someone had apparently wanted to
come in and then thought better of it. Gregor now stationed himself immediately
before the living-room door, determined to persuade any hesitating visitor to come in
or at least to discover who it might be; but the door was not opened again and he
waited in vain. In the early morning, when the doors were locked, they had all wanted
to come in, now that he had opened one door and the other had apparently been
opened during the day, no one came in and even the keys were on the other side of the
doors.
 It was late at night before the gas went out in the living room, and Gregor
could easily tell that his parents and his sister had all stayed awake until then, for he
could clearly hear the three of them stealing away on tiptoe. No one was likely to visit
him, not until the morning, that was certain; so he had plenty of time to meditate at
$ 131
his leisure on how he was to arrange his life afresh. But the lofty, empty room in which
he had to lie flat on the floor filled him with an apprehension he could not account for,
since it had been his very own room for the past five years -- and with a halfunconscious action, not without a slight feeling of shame, he scuttled under the sofa,
where he felt comfortable at once, although his back was a little cramped and he could
not lift his head up, and his only regret was that his body was too broad to get the
whole of it under the sofa.
 He stayed there all night, spending the time partly in a light slumber, from
which his hunger kept waking him up with a start, and partly in worrying and
sketching vague hopes, which all led to the same conclusion, that he must lie low for
the present and, by exercising patience and the utmost consideration, help the family
to bear the inconvenience he was bound to cause them in his present condition.
 Very early in the morning, it was still almost night, Gregor had the chance to
test the strength of his new resolutions, for his sister, nearly fully dressed, opened the
door from the hall and peered in. She did not see him at once, yet when she caught
sight of him under the sofa -- well, he had to be somewhere, he couldn't have flown
away, could he? -- she was so startled that without being able to help it she slammed
the door shut again. But as if regretting her behavior she opened the door again
immediately and came in on tiptoe, as if she were visiting an invalid even a stranger.
Gregor had pushed his head forward to the very edge of the sofa and watched her.
Would she notice that he had left the milk standing, and not for lack of hunger, and
would she bring in some other kind of food more to his taste? If she did not do it of
her own accord, he would rather starve than draw her attention to the fact, although
he felt a wild impulse to dart out from under the sofa, throw himself at her feet, and
beg her for something to eat. But his sister at once noticed, with surprise, that the
basin was still full, except for a little milk that had been spilled all around it, she lifted
it immediately, not with her bare hands, true, but with a cloth and carried it away.
Gregor was wildly curious to know what she would bring instead, and made various
$ 132
speculations about it. Yet what she actually did next, in the goodness of her heart, he
could never have guessed at. To find out what he liked she brought him a whole
selection of food, all set out on an old newspaper. There were old, half-decayed
vegetables, bones from last night's supper covered with a white sauce that had
thickened; some raisins and almonds; a piece of cheese that Gregor would have called
uneatable two days ago; a dry roll of bread, a buttered roll, and a roll both buttered and
salted. Besides all that, she set down again the same basin, into which she had poured
some water, and which was apparently to be reserved for his exclusive use. And with
fine tact, knowing that Gregor would not eat in her presence, she withdrew quickly
and even turned the key, to let him understand that he could take his ease as much as
he liked. Gregor's legs all whizzed toward the food. His wounds must have healed
completely, moreover, for he felt no disability, which amazed him and made him
reflect how more than a month ago he had cut one finger a little with a knife and had
still suffered pain from the wound only the day before yesterday. Am I less sensitive
now? he thought, and sucked greedily at the cheese, which above all the other edibles
attracted him at once and strongly. One after another and with tears of satisfaction in
his eyes he quickly devoured the cheese, the vegetables, and the sauce; the fresh food,
on the other hand, had no charms for him, he could not even stand the smell of it and
actually dragged away to some little distance the things he could eat. He had long
finished his meal and was only lying lazily on the same spot when his sister turned the
key slowly as a sign for him to retreat. That roused him at once, although he was
nearly asleep, and he hurried under the sofa again. But it took considerable selfcontrol for him to stay under the sofa, even for the short time his sister was in the
room, since the large meal had swollen his body somewhat and he was so cramped he
could hardly breathe. Slight attacks of breathlessness afflicted him and his eyes were
starting a little out of his head as he watched his unsuspecting sister sweeping together
with a broom not only the remains of what he had eaten but even the things he had
not touched, as if these were now of no use to anyone, and hastily shoveling it all into a
bucket, which she covered with a wooden lid and carried away. Hardly had she turned
her back when Gregor came from under the sofa and stretched and puffed himself out.
$ 133
 In this manner Gregor was fed, once in the early morning while his parents and
the servant girl were still asleep, and a second time after they had all had their midday
dinner, for then his parents took a short nap and the servant girl could be sent out on
some errand or other by his sister. Not that they would have wanted him to starve, of
course, but perhaps they could not have borne to know more about his feeding than
from hearsay, perhaps too his sister wanted to spare them such little anxieties
wherever possible, since they had quite enough to bear as it was.
 Under what pretext the doctor and the locksmith had been got rid of on that
first morning Gregor could not discover, for since what he said was not understood by
the others it never struck any of them, not even his sister, that he could understand
what they said, and so whenever his sister came into his room he had to content
himself with hearing her utter only a sigh now and then and an occasional appeal to
the saints. Later on, when she had got a little used to the situation -- of course she
could never get completely used to it -- she sometimes threw out a remark which was
kindly meant or could be so interpreted. "Well, he liked his dinner today," she would
say when Gregor had made a good clearance of his food; and when he had not eaten,
which gradually happened more and more often, she would say almost sadly:
"Everything's been left standing again."
 But although Gregor could get no news directly, he overheard a lot from the
neighboring rooms, and as soon as voices were audible, he would run to the door of
the room concerned and press his whole body against it. In the first few days especially
there was no conversation that did not refer to him somehow, even if only indirectly.
For two whole days there were family consultations at every mealtime about what
should be done; but also between meals the same subject was discussed, for there were
always at least two members of the family at home, since no one wanted to be alone in
the flat and to leave it quite empty was unthinkable. And on the very first of these days
the household cook -- it was not quite clear what and how much she knew of the
situation -- went down on her knees to his mother and begged leave to go, and when
$ 134
she departed, a quarter of an hour later, gave thanks for her dismissal with tears in her
eyes as if for the greatest benefit that could have been conferred on her, and without
any prompting swore a solemn oath that she would never say a single word to anyone
about what had happened.
 Now Gregor's sister had to cook too, helping her mother; true, the cooking did
not amount to much, for they ate scarcely anything. Gregor was always hearing one of
the family vainly urging another to eat and getting no answer but: "Thanks, I've had all
I want," or something similar. Perhaps they drank nothing either. Time and again his
sister kept asking his father if he wouldn't like some beer and offered kindly to go and
fetch it herself, and when he made no answer suggested that she could ask the
concierge to fetch it, so that he need feel no sense of obligation, but then a round "No"
came from his father and no more was said about it.
 In the course of that very first day Gregor's father explained the family's
financial position and prospects to both his mother and his sister. Now and then he
rose from the table to get some voucher or memorandum out of the small safe he had
rescued from the collapse of his business five years earlier. One could hear him
opening the complicated lock and rustling papers out and shutting it again. This
statement made by his father was the first cheerful information Gregor had heard
since his imprisonment. He had been of the opinion that nothing at all was left over
from his father's business, at least his father had never said anything to the contrary,
and of course he had not asked him directly. At that time Gregor's sole desire was to
do his utmost to help the family to forget as soon as possible the catastrophe that had
overwhelmed the business and thrown them all into a state of complete despair. And
so he had set to work with unusual ardor and almost overnight had become a
commercial traveler instead of a little clerk, with of course much greater chances of
earning money, and his success was immediately translated into good round coin
which he could lay on the table for his amazed and happy family. These had been fine
times, and they had never recurred, at least not with the same sense of glory, although
$ 135
later on Gregor had earned so much money that he was able to meet the expenses of
the whole household and did so. They had simply got used to it, both the family and
Gregor; the money was gratefully accepted and gladly given, but there was no special
uprush of warm feeling. With his sister alone had he remained intimate, and it was a
secret plan of his that she, who loved music, unlike himself, and could play movingly
on the violin, should be sent next year to study at the Conservatorium, despite the
great expense that would entail, which must be made up in some other way. During
his brief visits home the Conservatorium was often mentioned in the talks he had with
his sister, but always merely as a beautiful dream which could never come true, and his
parents discouraged even these innocent references to it; yet Gregor had made up his
mind firmly about it and meant to announce the fact with due solemnity on Christmas
Day.
 Such were the thoughts, completely futile in his present condition, that went
through his head as he stood clinging upright to the door and listening. Sometimes out
of sheer weariness he had to give up listening and let his head fall negligently against
the door, but he always had to pull himself together again at once, for even the slight
sound his head made was audible next door and brought all conversation to a stop.
"What can he be doing now?" his father would say after a while, obviously turning
toward the door, and only then would the interrupted conversation gradually be set
going again.
 Gregor was now informed as amply as he could wish -- for his father tended to
repeat himself in his explanations, partly because it was a long time since he had
handled such matters and partly because his mother could not always grasp things at
once -- that a certain amount of investments, a very small amount it was true, had
survived the wreck of their fortunes and had even increased a little because the
dividends had not been touched meanwhile. And besides that, the money Gregor
brought home every month -- he had kept only a few dollars for himself -- had never
been quite used up and now amounted to a small capital sum. Behind the door Gregor
$ 136
nodded his head eagerly, rejoiced at this evidence of unexpected thrift and foresight.
True, he could really have paid off some more of his father's debts to the chief with
this extra money, and so brought much nearer the day on which he could quit his job,
but doubtless it was better the way his father had arranged it.
 Yet this capital was by no means sufficient to let the family live on the interest
of it; for one year, perhaps, or at the most two, they could live on the principal, that
was all. It was simply a sum that ought not to be touched and should be kept for a
rainy day; money for living expenses would have to be earned. Now his father was still
hale enough but an old man, and he had done no work for the past five years and
could not be expected to do much; during these five years, the first years of leisure in
his laborious though unsuccessful life, he had grown rather fat and become sluggish.
And Gregor's old mother, how was she to earn a living with her asthma, which
troubled her even when she walked through the flat and kept her lying on a sofa every
other day panting for breath beside an open window? And was his sister to earn her
bread, she who was still a child of seventeen and whose life hitherto had been so
pleasant, consisting as it did in dressing herself nicely, sleeping long, helping in the
housekeeping, going out to a few modest entertainments, and above all playing the
violin? At first whenever the need for earning money was mentioned Gregor let go his
hold on the door and threw himself down on the cool leather sofa beside it, he felt so
hot with shame and grief.
 Often he just lay there the long nights through without sleeping at all,
scrabbling for hours on the leather. Or he nerved himself to the great effort of pushing
an armchair to the window, then crawled up over the window sill and, braced against
the chair, leaned against the windowpanes, obviously in some recollection of the sense
of freedom that looking out of a window always used to give him. For in reality day by
day things that were even a little way off were growing dimmer to his sight; the
hospital across the street, which he used to execrate for being all too often before his
eyes, was now quite beyond his range of vision, and if he had not known that he lived
$ 137
in Charlotte Street, a quiet street but still a city street, he might have believed that his
window gave on a desert waste where gray sky and gray land blended indistinguishably
into each other. His quick-witted sister only needed to observe twice that the armchair
stood by the window; after that whenever she had tidied the room she always pushed
the chair back to the same place at the window and even left the inner casements
open.
 If he could have spoken to her and thanked her for all she had to do for him, he
could have borne her ministrations better; as it was, they oppressed him. She certainly
tried to make as light as possible of whatever was disagreeable in her task, and as time
went on she succeeded, of course, more and more, but time brought more
enlightenment to Gregor too. The very way she came in distressed him. Hardly was
she in the room when she rushed to the window, without even taking time to shut the
door, careful as she was usually to shield the sight of Gregor's room from the others,
and as if she were almost suffocating tore the casements open with hasty fingers,
standing then in the open draught for a while even in the bitterest cold and drawing
deep breaths. This noisy scurry of hers upset Gregor twice a day; he would crouch
trembling under the sofa all the time, knowing quite well that she would certainly have
spared him such a disturbance had she found it at all possible to stay in his presence
without opening the window.
 On one occasion, about a month after Gregor's metamorphosis, when there
was surely no reason for her to be still startled at his appearance, she came a little
earlier than usual and found him gazing out of the window, quite motionless, and thus
well placed to look like a bogey. Gregor would not have been surprised had she not
come in at all, for she could not immediately open the window while he was there, but
not only did she retreat, she jumped back as if in alarm and banged the door shut; a
stranger might well have thought that he had been lying in wait for her there meaning
to bite her. Of course he hid himself under the sofa at once, but he had to wait until
midday before she came again, and she seemed more ill at ease than usual. This made
$ 138
him realize how repulsive the sight of him still was to her, and that it was bound to go
on being repulsive, and what an effort it must cost her not to run away even from the
sight of the small portion of his body that stuck out from under the sofa. In order to
spare her that, therefore, one day he carried a sheet on his back to the sofa -- it cost
him four hours' labor -- and arranged it there in such a way as to hide him completely,
so that even if she were to bend down she could not see him. Had she considered the
sheet unnecessary, she would certainly have stripped it off the sofa again, for it was
clear enough that this curtaining and confining of himself was not likely to conduce to
Gregor's comfort, but she left it where it was, and Gregor even fancied that he caught a
thankful glance from her eye when he lifted the sheet carefully a very little with his
head to see how she was taking the new arrangement.
 For the first fortnight his parents could not bring themselves to the point of
entering his room, and he often heard them expressing their appreciation of his sister's
activities, whereas formerly they had frequently scolded her for being as they thought
a somewhat useless daughter. But now, both of them often waited outside the door, his
father and his mother, while his sister tidied his room, and as soon as she came out she
had to tell them exactly how things were in the room, what Gregor had eaten, how he
had conducted himself this time, and whether there was not perhaps some slight
improvement in his condition. His mother, moreover, began relatively soon to want to
visit him, but his father and sister dissuaded her at first with arguments which Gregor
listened to very attentively and altogether approved. Later, however, she had to be held
back by main force, and when she cried out: "Do let me in to Gregor, he is my
unfortunate son! Can't you understand that I must go to him?" Gregor thought that it
might be well to have her come in, not every day, of course, but perhaps once a week;
she understood things, after all, much better than his sister, who was only a child
despite the efforts she was making and had perhaps taken on so difficult a task merely
out of childish thoughtlessness.
 Gregor's desire to see his mother was soon fulfilled. During the daytime he did
$ 139
not want to show himself at the window, out of consideration for his parents, but he
could not crawl very far around the few square yards of floor space he had, nor could
he bear lying quietly at rest all during the night, while he was fast losing any interest he
had ever taken in food, so that for mere recreation he had formed the habit of crawling
crisscross over the walls and ceiling. He especially enjoyed hanging suspended from
the ceiling; it was much better than lying on the floor; one could breathe more freely;
one's body swung and rocked lightly; and in the almost blissful absorption induced by
this suspension it could happen to his own surprise that he let go and fell plump on
the floor. Yet he now had his body much better under control than formerly, and even
such a big fall did him no harm. His sister at once remarked the new distraction
Gregor had found for himself -- he left traces behind him of the sticky stuff on his
soles wherever he crawled -- and she got the idea in her head of giving him as wide a
field as possible to crawl in and of removing the pieces of furniture that hindered him,
above all the chest of drawers and the writing desk. But that was more than she could
manage all by herself; she did not dare ask her father to help her; and as for the servant
girl, a young creature of sixteen who had had the courage to stay on after the cook's
departure, she could not be asked to help, for she had begged as a special favor that
she might keep the kitchen door locked and open it only on a definite summons; so
there was nothing left but to apply to her mother at an hour when her father was out.
And the old lady did come, with exclamations of joyful eagerness, which, however,
died away at the door of Gregor's room. Gregor's sister, of course, went in first, to see
that everything was in order before letting his mother enter. In great haste Gregor
pulled the sheet lower and tucked it more in folds so that it really looked as if it had
been thrown accidentally over the sofa. And this time he did not peer out from under
it; he renounced the pleasure of seeing his mother on this occasion and was only glad
that she had come at all. "Come in, he's out of sight," said his sister, obviously leading
her mother in by the hand. Gregor could now hear the two women struggling to shift
the heavy old chest from its place, and his sister claiming the greater part of the labor
for herself, without listening to the admonitions of her mother, who feared she might
overstrain herself. It took a long time. After at least a quarter of an hour's tugging his
$ 140
mother objected that the chest had better be left where it was, for in the first place it
was too heavy and could never be got out before his father came home, and standing
in the middle of the room like that it would only hamper Gregor's movements, while
in the second place it was not at all certain that removing the furniture would be doing
a service to Gregor. She was inclined to think to the contrary; the sight of the naked
walls made her own heart heavy, and why shouldn't Gregor have the same feeling,
considering that he had been used to his furniture for so long and might feel forlorn
without it. "And doesn't it look," she concluded in a low voice -- in fact she had been
almost whispering all the time as if to avoid letting Gregor, whose exact whereabouts
she did not know, hear even the tones of her voice, for she was convinced that he
could not understand her words -- "doesn't it look as if we were showing him, by
taking away his furniture, that we have given up hope of his ever getting better and are
just leaving him coldly to himself? I think it would be best to keep his room exactly as
it has always been, so that when he comes back to us he will find everything
unchanged and be able all the more easily to forget what has happened in between."
 On hearing these words from his mother Gregor realized that the lack of all
direct human speech for the past two months together with the monotony of family
life must have confused his mind, otherwise he could not account for the fact that he
had quite earnestly looked forward to having his room emptied of furnishing. Did he
really want his warm room, so comfortably fitted with old family furniture, to be
turned into a naked den in which he would certainly be able to crawl unhampered in
all directions but at the price of shedding simultaneously all recollection of his human
background? He had indeed been so near the brink of forgetfulness that only the voice
of his mother, which he had not heard for so long, had drawn him back from it.
Nothing should be taken out of his room; everything must stay as it was; he could not
dispense with the good influence of the furniture on his state of mind; and even if the
furniture did hamper him in his senseless crawling around and around, that was no
drawback but a great advantage.
$ 141
 Unfortunately his sister was of the contrary opinion; she had grown
accustomed, and not without reason, to consider herself an expert in Gregor's affairs
as against her parents, and so her mother's advice was now enough to make her
determined on the removal not only of the chest and the writing desk, which had been
her first intention, but of all the furniture except the indispensable sofa. This
determination was not, of course, merely the outcome of childish recalcitrance and of
the self-confidence she had recently developed so unexpectedly and at such cost; she
had in fact perceived that Gregor needed a lot of space to crawl about in, while on the
other hand he never used the furniture at all, so far as could be seen. Another factor
might also have been the enthusiastic temperament of an adolescent girl, which seeks
to indulge itself on every opportunity and which now tempted Grete to exaggerate the
horror of her brother's circumstances in order that she might do all the more for him.
In a room where Gregor lorded it all alone over empty walls no one save herself was
likely ever to set foot.
 And so she was not to be moved from her resolve by her mother, who seemed
moreover to be ill at ease in Gregor's room and therefore unsure of herself, was soon
reduced to silence, and helped her daughter as best she could to push the chest
outside. Now, Gregor could do without the chest, if need be, but the writing desk he
must retain. As soon as the two women had got the chest out of his room, groaning as
they pushed it, Gregor stuck his head out from under the sofa to see how he might
intervene as kindly and cautiously as possible. But as bad luck would have it, his
mother was the first to return, leaving Grete clasping the chest in the room next door
where she was trying to shift it all by herself, without of course moving it from the
spot. His mother however was not accustomed to the sight of him, it might sicken her
and so in alarm Gregor backed quickly to the other end of the sofa, yet could not
prevent the sheet from swaying a little in front. That was enough to put her on the
alert. She paused, stood still for a moment, and then went back to Grete.
 Although Gregor kept reassuring himself that nothing out of the way was
$ 142
happening, but only a few bits of furniture were being changed around, he soon had to
admit that all this trotting to and fro of the two women, their little ejaculations, and
the scraping of furniture along the floor affected him like a vast disturbance coming
from all sides at once, and however much he tucked in his head and legs and cowered
to the very floor he was bound to confess that he would not be able to stand it for long.
They were clearing his room out; taking away everything he loved; the chest in which
he kept his fret saw and other tools was already dragged off; they were now loosening
the writing desk which had almost sunk into the floor, the desk at which he had done
all his homework when he was at the commercial academy, at the grammar school
before that, and, yes, even at the primary school -- he had no more time to waste in
weighing the good intentions of the two women, whose existence he had by now
almost forgotten, for they were so exhausted that they were laboring in silence and
nothing could be heard but the heavy scuffling of their feet.
 And so he rushed out -- the women were just leaning against the writing desk
in the next room to give themselves a breather -- and four times changed his direction,
since he really did not know what to rescue first, then on the wall opposite, which was
already otherwise cleared, he was struck by the picture of the lady muffled in so much
fur and quickly crawled up to it and pressed himself to the glass, which was a good
surface to hold on to and comforted his hot belly. This picture at least, which was
entirely hidden beneath him, was going to be removed by nobody. He turned his head
toward the door of the living room so as to observe the women when they came back.
 They had not allowed themselves much of a rest and were already coming;
Crete had twined her arm around her mother and was almost supporting her. "Well,
what shall we take now?" said Crete, looking around. Her eyes met Gregor's from the
wall. She kept her composure, presumably because of her mother, bent her head down
to her mother, to keep her from looking up, and said, although in a fluttering,
unpremeditated voice: "Come, hadn't we better go back to the living room for a
moment?" Her intentions were clear enough to Gregor, she wanted to bestow her
$ 143
mother in safety and then chase him down from the wall. Well, just let her try it! He
clung to his picture and would not give it up. He would rather fly in Grete's face.
 But Grete's words had succeeded in disquieting her mother, who took a step to
one side, caught sight of the huge brown mass on the flowered wallpaper, and before
she was really conscious that what she saw was Gregor, screamed in a loud, hoarse
voice: "Oh God, oh God!" fell with outspread arms over the sofa as if giving up, and did
not move. "Gregor!" cried his sister, shaking her fist and glaring at him. This was the
first time she had directly addressed him since his metamorphosis. She ran into the
next room for some aromatic essence with which to rouse her mother from her
fainting fit. Gregor wanted to help too -- there was still time to rescue the picture --
but he was stuck fast to the glass and had to tear himself loose; he then ran after his
sister into the next room as if he could advise her, as he used to do; but then had to
stand helplessly behind her; she meanwhile searched among various small bottles and
when she turned around started in alarm at the sight of him; one bottle fell on the
floor and broke; a splinter of glass cut Gregor's face and some kind of corrosive
medicine splashed him; without pausing a moment longer Grete gathered up all the
bottles she could carry and ran to her mother with them; she banged the door shut
with her foot. Gregor was now cut off from his mother, who was perhaps nearly dying
because of him; he dared not open the door for fear of frightening away his sister, who
had to stay with her mother; there was nothing he could do but wait; and harassed by
self-reproach and worry he began now to crawl to and fro, over everything, walls,
furniture, and ceiling, and finally in his despair, when the whole room seemed to be
reeling around him, fell down onto the middle of the big table.
 A little while elapsed, Gregor was still lying there feebly and all around was
quiet, perhaps that was a good omen. Then the doorbell rang. The servant girl was of
course locked in her kitchen, and Grete would have to open the door. It was his father.
"What's been happening?" were his first words; Grete's face must have told him
everything. Grete answered in a muffled voice, apparently hiding her head on his
$ 144
breast: "Mother has been fainting, but she's better now. Gregor's broken loose." "Just
what I expected," said his father, "just what I've been telling you, but you women
would never listen." It was clear to Gregor that his father had taken the worst
interpretation of Grete's all too brief statement and was assuming that Gregor had
been guilty of some violent act. Therefore Gregor must now try to propitiate his
father, since he had neither time nor means for an explanation. And so he fled to the
door of his own room and crouched against it, to let his father see as soon as he came
in from the hall that his son had the good intention of getting back into his room
immediately and that it was not necessary to drive him there, but that if only the door
were opened he would disappear at once.
 Yet his father was not in the mood to perceive such fine distinctions. "Ah!" he
cried as soon as he appeared, in a tone that sounded at once angry and exultant.
Gregor drew his head back from the door and lifted it to look at his father. Truly, this
was not the father he had imagined to himself; admittedly he had been too absorbed of
late in his new recreation of crawling over the ceiling to take the same interest as
before in what was happening elsewhere in the flat, and he ought really to be prepared
for some changes. And yet, and yet, could that be his father? The man who used to lie
wearily sunk in bed whenever Gregor set out on a business journey; who welcomed
him back of an evening lying in a long chair in a dressing gown; who could not really
rise to his feet but only lifted his arms in greeting, and on the rare occasions when he
did go out with his family, on one or two Sundays a year and on highest holidays,
walked between Gregor and his mother, who were slow walkers anyhow, even more
slowly than they did, muffled in his old greatcoat, shuffling laboriously forward with
the help of his crook-handled stick which he set down most cautiously at every step
and, whenever he wanted to say anything, nearly always came to a full stop and
gathered his escort around him? Now he was standing there in fine shape; dressed in a
smart blue uniform with gold buttons, such as bank messengers wear; his strong
double chin bulged over the stiff high collar of his jacket; from under his bushy
eyebrows his black eyes darted fresh and penetrating glances; his onetime tangled
$ 145
white hair had been combed flat on either side of a shining and carefully exact parting.
He pitched his cap, which bore a gold monogram, probably the badge of some bank, in
a wide sweep across the whole room onto a sofa and with the tail-ends of his jacket
thrown back, his hands in his trouser pockets, advanced with a grim visage toward
Gregor. Likely enough he did not himself know what he meant to do; at any rate he
lifted his feet uncommonly high, and Gregor was dumbfounded at the enormous size
of his shoe soles. But Gregor could not risk standing up to him, aware as he had been
from the very first day of his new life that his father believed only the severest
measures suitable for dealing with him. And so he ran before his father, stopping when
he stopped and scuttling forward again when his father made any kind of move. In this
way they circled the room several times without anything decisive happening, indeed
the whole operation did not even look like a pursuit because it was carried out so
slowly. And so Gregor did not leave the floor, for he feared that his father might take
as a piece of peculiar wickedness any excursion of his over the walls or the ceiling. All
the same, he could not stay this course much longer, for while his father took one step
he had to carry out a whole series of movements. He was already beginning to feel
breathless, just as in his former life his lungs had not been very dependable. As he was
staggering along, trying to concentrate his energy on running, hardly keeping his eyes
open; in his dazed state never even thinking of any other escape than simply going
forward; and having almost forgotten that the walls were free to him, which in this
room were well provided with finely carved pieces of furniture full of knobs and
crevices -- suddenly something lightly flung landed close behind him and rolled before
him. It was an apple; a second apple followed immediately; Gregor came to a stop in
alarm; there was no point in running on, for his father was determined to bombard
him. He had filled his pockets with fruit from the dish on the sideboard and was now
shying apple after apple, without taking particularly good aim for the moment. The
small red apples rolled about the floor as if magnetized and cannoned into each other.
An apple thrown without much force grazed Gregor's back and glanced off harmlessly.
But another following immediately landed right on his back and sank in; Gregor
wanted to drag himself forward, as if this startling, incredible pain could be left behind
$ 146
him; but he felt as if nailed to the spot and flattened himself out in a complete
derangement of all his senses. With his last conscious look he saw the door of his
room being torn open and his mother rushing out ahead of his screaming sister, in
her underbodice, for her daughter had loosened her clothing to let her breathe more
freely and recover from her swoon, he saw his mother rushing toward his father,
leaving one after another behind her on the floor her loosened petticoats, stumbling
over her petticoats straight to his father and embracing him, in complete union with
him -- but here Gregor's sight began to fail -- with her hands clasped around his
father's neck as she begged for her son's life.
III
 The serious injury done to Gregor, which disabled him for more than a month
-- the apple went on sticking in his body as a visible reminder, since no one ventured
to remove it -- seemed to have made even his father recollect that Gregor was a
member of the family, despite his present unfortunate and repulsive shape, and ought
not to be treated as an enemy, that, on the contrary, family duty required the
suppression of disgust and the exercise of patience, nothing but patience.
 And although his injury had impaired, probably forever, his powers of
movement, and for the time being it took him long, long minutes to creep across his
room like an old invalid -- there was no question now of crawling up the wall -- yet in
his own opinion he was sufficiently compensated for this worsening of his condition
by the fact that toward evening the living-room door, which he used to watch intently
for an hour or two beforehand, was always thrown open, so that lying in the darkness
of his room, invisible to the family, he could see them all at the lamp-lit table and
listen to their talk, by general consent as it were, very different from his earlier
$ 147
eavesdropping.
 True, their intercourse lacked the lively character of former times, which he
had always called to mind with a certain wistfulness in the small hotel bedrooms
where he had been wont to throw himself down, tired out, on damp bedding. They
were now mostly very silent. Soon after supper his father would fall asleep in his
armchair; his mother and sister would admonish each other to be silent; his mother,
bending low over the lamp, stitched at fine sewing for an underwear firm; his sister,
who had taken a job as a salesgirl, was learning shorthand and French in the evenings
on the chance of bettering herself. Sometimes his father woke up, and as if quite
unaware that he had been sleeping said to his mother: "What a lot of sewing you're
doing today!" and at once fell asleep again, while the two women exchanged a tired
smile.
 With a kind of mulishness his father persisted in keeping his uniform on even
in the house; his dressing gown hung uselessly on its peg and he slept fully dressed
where he sat, as if he were ready for service at any moment and even here only at the
beck and call of his superior. As a result, his uniform, which was not brand-new to
start with, began to look dirty, despite all the loving care of the mother and sister to
keep it clean, and Gregor often spent whole evenings gazing at the many greasy spots
on the garment, gleaming with gold buttons always in a high state of polish, in which
the old man sat sleeping in extreme discomfort and yet quite peacefully.
 As soon as the clock struck ten his mother tried to rouse his father with gentle
words and to persuade him after that to get into bed, for sitting there he could not
have a proper sleep and that was what he needed most, since he had to go on duty at
six. But with the mulishness that had obsessed him since he became a bank messenger
he always insisted on staying longer at the table, although he regularly fell asleep again
and in the end only with the greatest trouble could be got out of his armchair and into
his bed. However insistently Gregor's mother and sister kept urging him with gentle
$ 148
reminders, he would go on slowly shaking his head for a quarter of an hour, keeping
his eyes shut, and refuse to get to his feet. The mother plucked at his sleeve,
whispering endearments in his ear, the sister left her lessons to come to her mother's
help, but Gregor's father was not to be caught. He would only sink down deeper in his
chair. Not until the two women hoisted him up by the armpits did he open his eyes
and look at them both, one after the other, usually with the remark: "This is a life. This
is the peace and quiet of my old age." And leaning on the two of them he would heave
himself up, with difficulty, as if he were a great burden to himself, suffer them to lead
him as far as the door and then wave them off and go on alone, while the mother
abandoned her needlework and the sister her pen in order to run after him and help
him farther.
 Who could find time, in this overworked and tired-out family, to bother about
Gregor more than was absolutely needful? The household was reduced more and
more; the servant girl was turned off; a gigantic bony charwoman with white hair
flying around her head came in morning and evening to do the rough work; everything
else was done by Gregor's mother, as well as great piles of sewing. Even various family
ornaments, which his mother and sister used to wear with pride at parties and
celebrations, had to be sold, as Gregor discovered of an evening from hearing them all
discuss the prices obtained. But what they lamented most was the fact that they could
not leave the flat which was much too big for their present circumstances, because
they could not think of any way to shift Gregor. Yet Gregor saw well enough that
consideration for him was not the main difficulty preventing the removal, for they
could have easily shifted him in some suitable box with a few air holes in it; what really
kept them from moving into another flat was rather their own complete hopelessness
and the belief that they had been singled out for a misfortune such as had never
happened to any of their relations or acquaintances. They fulfilled to the uttermost all
that the world demands of poor people, the father fetched breakfast for the small
clerks in the bank, the mother devoted her energy to making underwear for strangers,
the sister trotted to and fro behind the counter at the behest of customers, but more
$ 149
than this they had not the strength to do. And the wound in Gregor's back began to
nag at him afresh when his mother and sister, after getting his father into bed, came
back again, left their work lying, drew close to each other, and sat cheek by cheek;
when his mother, pointing toward his room, said: "Shut that door now, Grete," and he
was left again in darkness, while next door the women mingled their tears or perhaps
sat dry-eyed staring at the table.
 Gregor hardly slept at all by night or by day. He was often haunted by the idea
that next time the door opened he would take the family's affairs in hand again just as
he used to do; once more, after this long interval, there appeared in his thoughts the
figures of the chief and the chief clerk, the commercial travelers and the apprentices,
the porter who was so dull-witted, two or three friends in other firms, a chambermaid
in one of the rural hotels, a sweet and fleeting memory, a cashier in a milliner's shop,
whom he had wooed earnestly but too slowly -- they all appeared, together with
strangers or people he had quite forgotten, but instead of helping him and his family
they were one and all unapproachable and he was glad when they vanished. At other
times he would not be in the mood to bother about his family, he was only filled with
rage at the way they were neglecting him, and although he had no clear idea of what he
might care to eat he would make plans for getting into the larder to take the food that
was after all his due, even if he were not hungry. His sister no longer took thought to
bring him what might especially please him, but in the morning and at noon before
she went to business hurriedly pushed into his room with her foot any food that was
available, and in the evening cleared it out again with one sweep of the broom,
heedless of whether it had been merely tasted, or -- as most frequently happened -- left
untouched. The cleaning of his room, which she now did always in the evenings, could
not have been more hastily done. Streaks of dirt stretched along the walls, here and
there lay balls of dust and filth. At first Gregor used to station himself in some
particularly filthy corner when his sister arrived, in order to reproach her with it, so to
speak. But he could have sat there for weeks without getting her to make any
improvement; she could see the dirt as well as he did, but she had simply made up her
$ 150
mind to leave it alone. And yet, with a touchiness that was new to her, which seemed
anyhow to have infected the whole family, she jealously guarded her claim to be the
sole caretaker of Gregor's room. His mother once subjected his room to a thorough
cleaning, which was achieved only by means of several buckets of water -- all this
dampness of course upset Gregor too and he lay widespread, sulky, and motionless on
the sofa -- but she was well punished for it. Hardly had his sister noticed the changed
aspect of his room that evening than she rushed in high dudgeon into the living room
and, despite the imploringly raised hands of her mother, burst into a storm of
weeping, while her parents -- her father had of course been startled out of his chair --
looked on at first in helpless amazement; then they too began to go into action; the
father reproached the mother on his right for not having left the cleaning of Gregor's
room to his sister; shrieked at the sister on his left that never again was she to be
allowed to clean Gregor's room; while the mother tried to pull the father into his
bedroom, since he was beyond himself with agitation; the sister, shaken with sobs,
then beat upon the table with her small fists; and Gregor hissed loudly with rage
because not one of them thought of shutting the door to spare him such a spectacle
and so much noise.
 Still, even if the sister, exhausted by her daily work, had grown tired of looking
after Gregor as she did formerly, there was no need for his mother's intervention or for
Gregor's being neglected at all. The charwoman was there. This old widow, whose
strong bony frame had enabled her to survive the worst a long life could offer, by no
means recoiled from Gregor. Without being in the least curious she had once by
chance opened the door of his room and at the sight of Gregor, who, taken by surprise,
began to rush to and fro although no one was chasing him, merely stood there with
her arms folded. From that time she never failed to open his door a little for a
moment, morning and evening, to have a look at him. At first she even used to call
him to her, with words which apparently she took to be friendly, such as: "Come along,
then, you old dung beetle!" or "Look at the old dung beetle, then!" To such allocutions
Gregor made no answer, but stayed motionless where he was, as if the door had never
$ 151
been opened. Instead of being allowed to disturb him so senselessly whenever the
whim took her, she should rather have been ordered to clean out his room daily, that
charwoman! Once, early in the morning -- heavy rain was lashing on the
windowpanes, perhaps a sign that spring was on the way -- Gregor was so exasperated
when she began addressing him again that he ran at her, as if to attack her, although
slowly and feebly enough. But the charwoman instead of showing fright merely lifted
high a chair that happened to be beside the door, and as she stood there with her
mouth wide open it was clear that she meant to shut it only when she brought the
chair down on Gregor's back. "So you're not coming any nearer?" she asked, as Gregor
turned away again, and quietly put the chair back into the corner.
 Gregor was now eating hardly anything. Only when he happened to pass the
food laid out for him did he take a bit of something in his mouth as a pastime, kept it
there for an hour at a time, and usually spat it out again. At first he thought it was
chagrin over the state of his room that prevented him from eating, yet he soon got
used to the various changes in his room. It had become a habit in the family to push
into his room things there was no room for elsewhere, and there were plenty of these
now, since one of the rooms had been let to three lodgers. These serious gentlemen --
all three of them with full beards, as Gregor once observed through a crack in the door
-- had a passion for order, not only in their own room but, since they were now
members of the household, in all its arrangements, especially in the kitchen.
Superfluous, not to say dirty, objects they could not bear. Besides, they had brought
with them most of the furnishings they needed. For this reason many things could be
dispensed with that it was no use trying to sell but that should not be thrown away
either. All of them found their way into Gregor's room. The ash can likewise and the
kitchen garbage can. Anything that was not needed for the moment was simply flung
into Gregor's room by the charwoman, who did everything in a hurry; fortunately
Gregor usually saw only the object, whatever it was, and the hand that held it. Perhaps
she intended to take the things away again as time and opportunity offered, or to
collect them until she could throw them all out in a heap, but in fact they just lay
$ 152
wherever she happened to throw them, except when Gregor pushed his way through
the junk heap and shifted it somewhat, at first out of necessity, because he had not
room enough to crawl, but later with increasing enjoyment, although after such
excursions, being sad and weary to death, he would lie motionless for hours. And since
the lodgers often ate their supper at home in the common living room, the livingroom door stayed shut many an evening, yet Gregor reconciled himself quite easily to
the shutting of the door, for often enough on evenings when it was opened he had
disregarded it entirely and lain in the darkest corner of his room, quite unnoticed by
the family. But on one occasion the charwoman left the door open a little and it stayed
ajar even when the lodgers came in for supper and the lamp was lit. They set
themselves at the top end of the table where formerly Gregor and his father and
mother had eaten their meals, unfolded their napkins, and took knife and fork in hand.
At once his mother appeared in the other doorway with a dish of meat and close
behind her his sister with a dish of potatoes piled high. The food steamed with a thick
vapor. The lodgers bent over the food set before them as if to scrutinize it before
eating, in fact the man in the middle, who seemed to pass for an authority with the
other two, cut a piece of meat as it lay on the dish, obviously to discover if it were
tender or should be sent back to the kitchen. He showed satisfaction, and Gregor's
mother and sister, who had been watching anxiously, breathed freely and began to
smile.
 The family itself took its meals in the kitchen. Nonetheless, Gregor's father
came into the living room before going into the kitchen and with one prolonged bow,
cap in hand, made a round of the table. The lodgers all stood up and murmured
something in their beards. When they were alone again they ate their food in almost
complete silence. It seemed remarkable to Gregor that among the various noises
coming from the table he could always distinguish the sound of their masticating
teeth, as if this were a sign to Gregor that one needed teeth in order to eat, and that
with toothless jaws even of the finest make one could do nothing. "I'm hungry
enough," said Gregor sadly to himself, "but not for that kind of food. How these
$ 153
lodgers are stuffing themselves, and here am I dying of starvation!"
 On that very evening -- during the whole of his time there Gregor could not
remember ever having heard the violin -- the sound of violin-playing came from the
kitchen. The lodgers had already finished their supper, the one in the middle had
brought out a newspaper and given the other two a $ apiece, and now they were
leaning back at ease reading and smoking. When the violin began to play they pricked
up their ears, got to their feet, and went on tiptoe to the hall door where they stood
huddled together. Their movements must have been heard in the kitchen, for Gregor's
father called out: "Is the violin-playing disturbing you, gentlemen? It can be stopped at
once." "On the contrary," said the middle lodger, "could not Fräulein Samsa come and
play in this room, beside us, where it is much more convenient and comfortable?" "Oh
certainly," cried Gregor's father, as if he were the violin-player. The lodgers came back
into the living room and waited. Presently Gregor's father arrived with the music
stand, his mother carrying the music and his sister with the violin. His sister quietly
made everything ready to start playing; his parents, who had never let rooms before
and so had an exaggerated idea of the courtesy due to lodgers, did not venture to sit
down on their own chairs; his father leaned against the door, the right hand thrust
between two buttons of his livery coat, which was formally buttoned up; but his
mother was offered a chair by one of the lodgers and, since she left the chair just
where he had happened to put it, sat down in a corner to one side.
 Gregor's sister began to play; the father and mother, from either side, intently
watched the movements of her hands. Gregor, attracted by the playing, ventured to
move forward a little until his head was actually inside the living room. He felt hardly
any surprise at his growing lack of consideration for the others; there had been a time
when he prided himself on being considerate. And yet just on this occasion he had
more reason than ever to hide himself, since, owing to the amount of dust that lay
thick in his room and rose into the air at the slightest movement, he too was covered
with dust; fluff and hair and remnants of food trailed with him, caught on his back and
$ 154
along his sides; his indifference to everything was much too great for him to turn on
his back and scrape himself clean on the carpet, as once he had done several times a
day. And in spite of his condition, no shame deterred him from advancing a little over
the spotless floor of the living room.
 To be sure, no one was aware of him. The family was entirely absorbed in the
violin-playing; the lodgers, however, who first of all had stationed themselves, hands in
pockets, much too close behind the music stand so that they could all have read the
music, which must have bothered his sister, had soon retreated to the window, half
whispering with downbent heads, and stayed there while his father turned an anxious
eye on them. Indeed, they were making it more than obvious that they had been
disappointed in their expectation of hearing good or enjoyable violin-playing, that they
had had more than enough of the performance and only out of courtesy suffered a
continued disturbance of their peace. From the way they all kept blowing the smoke of
their cigars high in the air through nose and mouth one could divine their irritation.
And yet Gregor's sister was playing so beautifully. Her face leaned sideways, intently
and sadly her eyes followed the notes of music. Gregor crawled a little farther forward
and lowered his head to the ground so that it might be possible for his eyes to meet
hers. Was he an animal, that music had such an effect upon him? He felt as if the way
were opening before him to the unknown nourishment he craved. He was determined
to push forward till he reached his sister, to pull at her skirt and so let her know that
she was to come into his room with her violin, for no one here appreciated her playing
as he would appreciate it. He would never let her out of his room, at least, not so long
as he lived; his frightful appearance would become, for the first time, useful to him; he
would watch all the doors of his room at once and spit at intruders; but his sister
should need no constraint, she should stay with him of her own free will; she should sit
beside him on the sofa, bend down her ear to him, and hear him confide that he had
had the firm intention of sending her to the Conservatorium, and that, but for his
mishap, last Christmas -- surely Christmas was long past? -- he would have announced
it to everybody without allowing a single objection. After this confession his sister
$ 155
would be so touched that she would burst into tears, and Gregor would then raise
himself to her shoulder and kiss her on the neck, which, now that she went to
business, she kept free of any ribbon or collar.
 "Mr. Samsa!" cried the middle lodger to Gregor's father, and pointed, without
wasting any more words, at Gregor, now working himself slowly forward. The violin
fell silent, the middle lodger first smiled to his friends with a shake of the head and
then looked at Gregor again. Instead of driving Gregor out, his father seemed to think
it more needful to begin by soothing down the lodgers, although they were not at all
agitated and apparently found Gregor more entertaining than the violin-playing. He
hurried toward them and, spreading out his arms, tried to urge them back into their
own room and at the same time to block their view of Gregor. They now began to be
really a little angry, one could not tell whether because of the old man's behavior or
because it had just dawned on them that all unwittingly they had such a neighbor as
Gregor next door. They demanded explanations of his father, they waved their arms
like him, tugged uneasily at their beards, and only with reluctance backed toward their
room. Meanwhile Gregor's sister, who stood there as if lost when her playing was so
abruptly broken off, came to life again, pulled herself together all at once after
standing for a while holding violin and bow in nervelessly hanging hands and staring at
her music, pushed her violin into the lap of her mother, who was still sitting in her
chair fighting asthmatically for breath, and ran into the lodgers' room to which they
were now being shepherded by her father rather more quickly than before. One could
see the pillows and blankets on the beds flying under her accustomed fingers and
being laid in order. Before the lodgers had actually reached their room she had
finished making the beds and slipped out.
 The old man seemed once more to be so possessed by his mulish selfassertiveness that he was forgetting all the respect he should show to his lodgers. He
kept driving them on and driving them on until in the very door of the bedroom the
middle lodger stamped his foot loudly on the floor and so brought him to a halt. "I beg
$ 156
to announce," said the lodger, lifting one hand and looking also at Gregor's mother
and sister, "that because of the disgusting conditions prevailing in this household and
family" -- here he spat on the floor with emphatic brevity -- "I give you notice on the
spot. Naturally I won't pay you a penny for the days I have lived here, on the contrary I
shall consider bringing an action for damages against you, based on claims -- believe
me -- that will be easily susceptible of proof." He ceased and stared straight in front of
him, as if he expected something. In fact his two friends at once rushed into the breach
with these words: "And we too give notice on the spot." On that he seized the door
handle and shut the door with a slam.
 Gregor's father, groping with his hands, staggered forward and fell into his
chair; it looked as if he were stretching himself there for his ordinary evening nap, but
the marked jerkings of his head, which were as if uncontrollable, showed that he was
far from asleep. Gregor had simply stayed quietly all the time on the spot where the
lodgers had espied him. Disappointment at the failure of his plan, perhaps also the
weakness arising from extreme hunger, made it impossible for him to move. He
feared, with a fair degree of certainty, that at any moment the general tension would
discharge itself in a combined attack upon him, and he lay waiting. He did not react
even to the noise made by the violin as it fell off his mother's lap from under her
trembling fingers and gave out a resonant note.
 "My dear parents," said his sister, slapping her hand on the table by way of
introduction, "things can't go on like this. Perhaps you don't realize that, but I do. I
won't utter my brother's name in the presence of this creature, and so all I say is: we
must try to get rid of it. We've tried to look after it and to put up with it as far as is
humanly possible, and I don't think anyone could reproach us in the slightest."
 "She is more than right," said Gregor's father to himself. His mother, who was
still choking for lack of breath, began to cough hollowly into her hand with a wild look
in her eyes.
$ 157
 His sister rushed over to her and held her forehead. His father's thoughts
seemed to have lost their vagueness at Grete's words, he sat more upright, fingering
his service cap that lay among the plates still lying on the table from the lodgers'
supper, and from time to time looked at the still form of Gregor.
 "We must try to get rid of it," his sister now said explicitly to her father, since
her mother was coughing too much to hear a word, "it will be the death of both of you,
I can see that coming. When one has to work as hard as we do, all of us, one can't
stand this continual torment at home on top of it. At least I can't stand it any longer."
And she burst into such a passion of sobbing that her tears dropped on her mother's
face, where she wiped them off mechanically.
 "My dear," said the old man sympathetically, and with evident understanding,
"but what can we do?"
 Gregor's sister merely shrugged her shoulders to indicate the feeling of
helplessness that had now overmastered her during her weeping fit, in contrast to her
former confidence.
 "If he could understand us," said her father, half questioningly; Grete, still
sobbing, vehemently waved a hand to show how unthinkable that was.
 "If he could understand us," repeated the old man, shutting his eyes to consider
his daughter's conviction that understanding was impossible, "then perhaps we might
come to some agreement with him. But as it is --"
 "He must go," cried Gregor's sister, "that's the only solution, Father. You must
just try to get rid of the idea that this is Gregor. The fact that we've believed it for so
long is the root of all our trouble. But how can it be Gregor? If this were Gregor, he
would have realized long ago that human beings can't live with such a creature, and
he'd have gone away on his own accord. Then we wouldn't have any brother, but we'd
$ 158
be able to go on living and keep his memory in honor. As it is, this creature persecutes
us, drives away our lodgers, obviously wants the whole apartment to himself, and
would have us all sleep in the gutter. Just look, Father," she shrieked all at once, "he's at
it again!" And in an access of panic that was quite incomprehensible to Gregor she
even quitted her mother, literally thrusting the chair from her as if she would rather
sacrifice her mother than stay so near to Gregor, and rushed behind her father, who
also rose up, being simply upset by her agitation, and half spread his arms out as if to
protect her.
 Yet Gregor had not the slightest intention of frightening anyone, far less his
sister. He had only begun to turn around in order to crawl back to his room, but it was
certainly a startling operation to watch, since because of his disabled condition he
could not execute the difficult turning movements except by lifting his head and then
bracing it against the floor over and over again. He paused and looked around. His
good intentions seemed to have been recognized; the alarm had only been momentary.
Now they were all watching him in melancholy silence. His mother lay in her chair,
her legs stiffly outstretched and pressed together, her eyes almost closing for sheer
weariness; his father and his sister were sitting beside each other, his sister's arm
around the old man's neck.
 Perhaps I can go on turning around now, thought Gregor, and began his labors
again. He could not stop himself from panting with the effort, and had to pause now
and then to take breath. Nor did anyone harass him, he was left entirely to himself.
When he had completed the turn-around he began at once to crawl straight back. He
was amazed at the distance separating him from his room and could not understand
how in his weak state he had managed to accomplish the same journey so recently,
almost without remarking it. Intent on crawling as fast as possible, he barely noticed
that not a single word, not an ejaculation from his family, interfered with his progress.
Only when he was already in the doorway did he turn his head around, not completely,
for his neck muscles were getting stiff, but enough to see that nothing had changed
$ 159
behind him except that his sister had risen to her feet. His last glance fell on his
mother, who was not quite overcome by sleep.
 Hardly was he well inside his room when the door was hastily pushed shut,
bolted, and locked. The sudden noise in his rear startled him so much that his little
legs gave beneath him. It was his sister who had shown such haste. She had been
standing ready waiting and had made a light spring forward, Gregor had not even
heard her coming, and she cried "At last!" to her parents as she turned the key in the
lock.
 "And what now?" said Gregor to himself, looking around in the darkness. Soon
he made the discovery that he was now unable to stir a limb. This did not surprise
him, rather it seemed unnatural that he should ever actually have been able to move
on these feeble little legs. Otherwise he felt relatively comfortable. True, his whole
body was aching, but it seemed that the pain was gradually growing less and would
finally pass away. The rotting apple in his back and the inflamed area around it, all
covered with soft dust, already hardly troubled him. He thought of his family with
tenderness and love. The decision that he must disappear was one that he held to even
more strongly than his sister, if that were possible. In this state of vacant and peaceful
meditation he remained until the tower clock struck three in the morning. The first
broadening of light in the world outside the window entered his consciousness once
more. Then his head sank to the floor of its own accord and from his nostrils came the
last faint flicker of his breath.
 When the charwoman arrived early in the morning -- what between her
strength and her impatience she slammed all the doors so loudly, never mind how
often she had been begged not to do so, that no one in the whole apartment could
enjoy any quiet sleep after her arrival -- she noticed nothing unusual as she took her
customary peep into Gregor's room. She thought he was lying motionless on purpose,
pretending to be in the sulks; she credited him with every kind of intelligence. Since
$ 160
she happened to have the long-handled broom in her hand she tried to tickle him up
with it from the doorway. When that too produced no reaction she felt provoked and
poked at him a little harder, and only when she had pushed him along the floor
without meeting any resistance was her attention aroused. It did not take her long to
establish the truth of the matter, and her eyes widened, she let out a whistle, yet did
not waste much time over it but tore open the door of the Samsas' bedroom and yelled
into the darkness at the top of her voice: "Just look at this, it's dead; it's lying here dead
and done for!"
 Mr. and Mrs. Samsa started up in their double bed and before they realized the
nature of the charwoman's announcement had some difficulty in overcoming the
shock of it. But then they got out of bed quickly, one on either side, Mr. Samsa
throwing a blanket over his shoulders, Mrs. Samsa in nothing but her nightgown; in
this array they entered Gregor's room. Meanwhile the door of the living room opened,
too, where Grete had been sleeping since the advent of the lodgers; she was completely
dressed as if she had not been to bed, which seemed to be confirmed also by the
paleness of her face. "Dead?" said Mrs. Samsa, looking questioningly at the
charwoman, although she would have investigated for herself, and the fact was
obvious enough without investigation. "I should say so," said the charwoman, proving
her words by pushing Gregor's corpse a long way to one side with her broomstick.
Mrs. Samsa made a movement as if to stop her, but checked it. "Well," said Mr. Samsa,
"now thanks be to God." He crossed himself, and the three women followed his
example. Grete, whose eyes never left the corpse, said: "Just see how thin he was. It's
such a long time since he's eaten anything. The food came out again just as it went in."
Indeed, Gregor's body was completely flat and dry, as could only now be seen when it
was no longer supported by the legs and nothing prevented one from looking closely
at it.
 "Come in beside us, Grete, for a little while," said Mrs. Samsa with a tremulous
smile, and Grete, not without looking back at the corpse, followed her parents into
$ 161
their bedroom. The charwoman shut the door and opened the window wide. Although
it was so early in the morning a certain softness was perceptible in the fresh air. After
all, it was already the end of March.
 The three lodgers emerged from their room and were surprised to see no
breakfast; they had been forgotten. "Where's our breakfast?" said the middle lodger
peevishly to the charwoman. But she put her finger to her lips and hastily, without a
word, indicated by gestures that they should go into Gregor's room. They did so and
stood, their hands in the pockets of their somewhat shabby coats, around Gregor's
corpse in the room where it was now fully light.
 At that the door of the Samsas' bedroom opened and Mr. Samsa appeared in
his uniform, his wife on one arm, his daughter on the other. They all looked a little as
if they had been crying; from time to time Grete hid her face on her father's arm.
 "Leave my house at once!" said Mr. Samsa, and pointed to the door without
disengaging himself from the women. "What do you mean by that?" said the middle
lodger, taken somewhat aback, with a feeble smile. The two others put their hands
behind them and kept rubbing them together, as if in gleeful expectation of a fine setto in which they were bound to come off the winners. "I mean just what I say,"
answered Mr. Samsa, and advanced in a straight line with his two companions toward
the lodger. He stood his ground at first quietly, looking at the floor as if his thoughts
were taking a new pattern in his head. "Then let us go, by all means," he said, and
looked up at Mr. Samsa as if in a sudden access of humility he were expecting some
renewed sanction for this decision. Mr. Samsa merely nodded briefly once or twice
with meaning eyes. Upon that the lodger really did go with long strides into the hall,
his two friends had been listening and had quite stopped rubbing their hands for some
moments and now went scuttling after him as if afraid that Mr. Samsa might get into
the hall before them and cut them off from their leader. In the hall they all three took
their hats from the rack, their sticks from the umbrella stand, bowed in silence, and
$ 162
quitted the apartment. With a suspiciousness that proved quite unfounded Mr. Samsa
and the two women followed them out to the landing; leaning over the banister they
watched the three figures slowly but surely going down the long stairs, vanishing from
sight at a certain turn of the staircase on every floor and coming into view again after a
moment or so; the more they dwindled, the more the Samsa family's interest in them
dwindled, and when a butcher's boy met them and passed them on the stairs coming
up proudly with a tray on his head, Mr. Samsa and the two women soon left the
landing and as if a burden had been lifted from them went back into their apartment.
 They decided to spend this day in resting and going for a stroll; they had not
only deserved such a respite from work, but absolutely needed it. And so they sat
down at the table and wrote three notes of excuse, Mr. Samsa to his board of
management, Mrs. Samsa to her employer, and Grete to the head of her firm. While
they were writing, the charwoman came in to say that she was going now, since her
morning's work was finished. At first they only nodded without looking up, but as she
kept hovering there they eyed her irritably. "Well?" said Mr. Samsa. The charwoman
stood grinning in the doorway as if she had good news to impart to the family but
meant not to say a word unless properly questioned. The small ostrich feather
standing upright on her hat, which had annoyed Mr. Samsa ever since she was
engaged, was waving gaily in all directions. "Well, what is it then?" asked Mrs. Samsa,
who obtained more respect from the charwoman than the others. "Oh," said the
charwoman, giggling so amiably that she could not at once continue, "just this, you
don't need to bother about how to get rid of the thing next door. It's been seen to
already." Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent over their letters again, as if preoccupied; Mr.
Samsa, who perceived that she was eager to begin describing it all in detail, stopped
her with a decisive hand. But since she was not allowed to tell her story, she
remembered the great hurry she was in, obviously deeply huffed: "Bye, everybody," she
said, whirling off violently, and departed with a frightful slamming of doors.
 "She'll be given notice tonight," said Mr. Samsa, but neither from his wife nor
$ 163
his daughter did he get any answer, for the charwoman seemed to have shattered again
the composure they had barely achieved. They rose, went to the window and stayed
there, clasping each other tight. Mr. Samsa turned in his chair to look at them and
quietly observed them for a little. Then he called out: "Come along, now, do. Let
bygones be bygones. And you might have some consideration for me." The two of
them complied at once, hastened to him, caressed him, and quickly finished their
letters.
 Then they all three left the apartment together, which was more than they had
done for months, and went by tram into the open country outside the town. The tram,
in which they were the only passengers, was filled with warm sunshine. Leaning
comfortably back in their seats they canvassed their prospects for the future, and it
appeared on closer inspection that these were not at all bad, for the jobs they had got,
which so far they had never really discussed with each other, were all three admirable
and likely to lead to better things later on. The greatest immediate improvement in
their condition would of course arise from moving to another house; they wanted to
take a smaller and cheaper but also better situated and more easily run apartment than
the one they had, which Gregor had selected. While they were thus conversing, it
struck both Mr. and Mrs. Samsa, almost at the same moment, as they became aware of
their daughter's increasing vivacity, that in spite of all the sorrow of recent times,
which had made her cheeks pale, she had bloomed into a pretty girl with a good figure.
They grew quieter and half unconsciously exchanged glances of complete agreement,
having come to the conclusion that it would soon be time to find a good husband for
her. And it was like a confirmation of their new dreams and excellent intentions that
at the end of their journey their daughter sprang to her feet first and stretched her
young body.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 164
In the Penal Colony
 "It's a remarkable piece of apparatus," said the officer to the explorer and
surveyed with a certain air of admiration the apparatus which was after all quite
familiar to him. The explorer seemed to have accepted merely out of politeness the
Commandant's invitation to witness the execution of a soldier condemned to death for
disobedience and insulting behavior to a superior. Nor did the colony itself betray
much interest in this execution. At least, in the small sandy valley, a deep hollow
surrounded on all sides by naked crags, there was no one present save the officer, the
explorer, the condemned man, who was a stupid-looking, wide-mouthed creature with
bewildered hair and face, and the soldier who held the heavy chain controlling the
small chains locked on the prisoner's ankles, wrists, and neck, chains that were
themselves attached to each other by communicating links. In any case, the
condemned man looked so like a submissive dog that one might have thought he
could be left to run free on the surrounding hills and would only need to be whistled
for when the execution was due to begin.
 The explorer did not much care about the apparatus and walked up and down
behind the prisoner with almost visible indifference while the officer made the last
$ 165
adjustments, now creeping beneath the structure, which was bedded deep in the earth,
now climbing a ladder to inspect its upper parts. These were tasks that might well have
been left to a mechanic, but the officer performed them with great zeal, whether
because he was a devoted admirer of the apparatus or because of other reasons the
work could be entrusted to no one else. "Ready now!" he called at last and climbed
down from the ladder. He looked uncommonly limp, breathed with his mouth wide
open, and had tucked two fine ladies' handkerchiefs under the collar of his uniform.
"These uniforms are too heavy for the tropics, surely," said the explorer, instead of
making some inquiry about the apparatus, as the officer had expected. "Of course,"
said the officer, washing his oily and greasy hands in a bucket of water that stood
ready, "but they mean home to us; we don't want to forget about home. Now just have
a look at this machine," he added at once, simultaneously drying his hands on a towel
and indicating the apparatus. "Up till now a few things still had to be set by hand, but
from this moment it works all by itself." The explorer nodded and followed him. The
officer, anxious to secure himself against all contingencies, said: "Things sometimes go
wrong, of course; I hope that nothing goes wrong today, but we have to allow for the
possibility. The machinery should go on working continuously for twelve hours. But if
anything does go wrong it will only be some small matter that can be set right at once."
 "Won't you take a seat?" he asked finally, drawing a cane chair out from among
a heap of them and offering it to the explorer, who could not refuse it. He was now
sitting at the edge of a pit, into which he glanced for a fleeting moment. It was not very
deep. On one side of the pit the excavated soil had been piled up in a rampart, on the
other side of it stood the apparatus. "I don't know," said the officer, "if the
Commandant has already explained this apparatus to you." The explorer waved one
hand vaguely; the officer asked for nothing better, since now he could explain the
apparatus himself. "This apparatus," he said, taking hold of a crank handle and leaning
against it, "was invented by our former Commandant. I assisted at the very earliest
experiments and had a share in all the work until its completion. But the credit of
inventing it belongs to him alone. Have you ever heard of our former Commandant?
$ 166
No? Well, it isn't saying too much if I tell you that the organization of the whole penal
colony is his work. We who were his friends knew even before he died that the
organization of the colony was so perfect that his successor, even with a thousand new
schemes in his head, would find it impossible to alter anything, at least for many years
to come. And our prophecy has come true; the new Commandant has had to
acknowledge its truth. A pity you never met the old Commandant! -- But," the officer
interrupted himself, "I am rambling on, and here stands his apparatus before us. It
consists, as you see, of three parts. In the course of time each of these parts has
acquired a kind of popular nickname. The lower one is called the 'Bed,' the upper one
the 'Designer,' and this one here in the middle that moves up and down is called the
'Harrow.' " "The Harrow?" asked the explorer. He had not been listening very
attentively, the glare of the sun in the shadeless valley was altogether too strong, it was
difficult to collect one's thoughts. All the more did he admire the officer, who in spite
of his tight-fitting full-dress uniform coat, amply befrogged and weighed down by
epaulettes, was pursuing his subject with such enthusiasm and, besides talking, was
still tightening a screw here and there with a spanner. As for the soldier, he seemed to
be in much the same condition as the explorer. He had wound the prisoner's chain
around both his wrists, propped himself on his rifle, let his head hang, and was paying
no attention to anything. That did not surprise the explorer, for the officer was
speaking French, and certainly neither the soldier nor the prisoner understood a word
of French. It was all the more remarkable, therefore, that the prisoner was nonetheless
making an effort to follow the officer's explanations. With a kind of drowsy persistence
he directed his gaze wherever the officer pointed a finger, and at the interruption of
the explorer's question he, too, as well as the officer, looked around.
 "Yes, the Harrow," said the officer, "a good name for it. The needles are set in
like the teeth of a harrow and the whole thing works something like a harrow,
although its action is limited to one place and contrived with much more artistic skill.
Anyhow, you'll soon understand it. On the Bed here the condemned man is laid -- I'm
going to describe the apparatus first before I set it in motion. Then you'll be able to
$ 167
follow the proceedings better. Besides, one of the cogwheels in the Designer is badly
worn; it creaks a lot when it's working; you can hardly hear yourself speak; spare parts,
unfortunately, are difficult to get here. -- Well, here is the Bed, as I told you. It is
completely covered with a layer of cotton wool; you'll find out why later. On this
cotton wool the condemned man is laid, face down, quite naked, of course; here are
straps for the hands, here for the feet, and here for the neck, to bind him fast. Here at
the head of the Bed, where the rnan, as I said, first lays down his face, is this little gag
of felt, which can be easily regulated to go straight into his mouth. It is meant to keep
him from screaming and biting his tongue. Of course the man is forced to take the felt
into his mouth, for otherwise his neck would be broken by the strap." "Is that cotton
wool?" asked the explorer, bending forward. "Yes, certainly," said the officer, with a
smile, "feel it for yourself." He took the explorer's hand and guided it over the Bed. "It's
specially prepared cotton wool, that's why it looks so different; I'll tell you presently
what it's for." The explorer already felt a dawning interest in the apparatus; he
sheltered his eyes from the sun with one hand and gazed up at the structure. It was a
huge affair. The Bed and the Designer were of the same size and looked like two dark
wooden chests. The Designer hung about two meters above the Bed; each of them was
bound at the corners with four rods of brass that almost flashed out rays in the
sunlight. Between the chests shuttled the Harrow on a ribbon of steel.
 The officer had scarcely noticed the explorer's previous indifference, but he
was now well aware of his dawning interest; so he stopped explaining in order to leave
a space of time for quiet observation. The condemned man imitated the explorer;
since he could not use a hand to shelter his eyes he gazed upwards without shade.
 "Well, the man lies down," said the explorer, leaning back in his chair and
crossing his legs.
 "Yes," said the officer, pushing his cap back a little and passing one hand over
his heated face, "now listen! Both the Bed and the Designer have an electric battery
$ 168
each; the Bed needs one for itself, the Designer for the Harrow. As soon as the man is
strapped down, the Bed is set in motion. It quivers in minute, very rapid vibrations,
both from side to side and up and down. You will have seen similar apparatus in
hospitals; but in our Bed the movements are all precisely calculated; you see, they have
to correspond very exactly to the movements of the Harrow. And the Harrow is the
instrument for the actual execution of the sentence."
 "And how does the sentence run?" asked the explorer.
 "You don't know that either?" said the officer in amazement, and bit his lips.
"Forgive me if my explanations seem rather incoherent. I do beg your pardon. You see,
the Commandant always used to do the explaining; but the new Commandant shirks
this duty; yet that such an important visitor" -- the explorer tried to deprecate the
honor with both hands, the officer, however, insisted -- "that such an important visitor
should not even be told about the kind of sentence we pass is a new development,
which --" He was just on the point of using strong language but checked himself and
said only: "I was not informed, it is not my fault. In any case, I am certainly the best
person to explain our procedure, since I have here" -- he patted his breast pocket --
"the relevant drawings made by our former Commandant."
 "The Commandant's own drawings?" asked the explorer. "Did he combine
everything in himself, then? Was he soldier, judge, mechanic, chemist, and
draughtsman?"
 "Indeed he was," said the officer, nodding assent, with a remote, glassy look.
Then he inspected his hands critically; they did not seem clean enough to him for
touching the drawings; so he went over to the bucket and washed them again. Then he
drew out a small leather wallet and said: "Our sentence does not sound severe.
Whatever commandment the prisoner has disobeyed is written upon his body by the
Harrow. This prisoner, for instance" -- the officer indicated the man -- "will have
written on his body: HONOR THY SUPERIORS! "
$ 169
 The explorer glanced at the man; he stood, as the officer pointed him out, with
bent head, apparently listening with all his ears in an effort to catch what was being
said. Yet the movement of his blubber lips, closely pressed together, showed clearly
that he could not understand a word. Many questions were troubling the explorer, but
at the sight of the prisoner he asked only: "Does he know his sentence?" "No," said the
officer, eager to go on with his exposition, but the explorer interrupted him: "He
doesn't know the sentence that has been passed on him?" "No," said the officer again,
pausing a moment as if to let the explorer elaborate his question, and then said: "There
would be no point in telling him. He'll learn it on his body." The explorer intended to
make no answer, but he felt the prisoner's gaze turned on him; it seemed to ask if he
approved such goings-on. So he bent forward again, having already leaned back in his
chair, and put another question: "But surely he knows that he has been sentenced?"
"Nor that either," said the officer, smiling at the explorer as if expecting him to make
further surprising remarks. "No," said the explorer, wiping his forehead, "then he can't
know either whether his defense was effective?" "He has had no chance of putting up a
defense," said the officer, turning his eyes away as if speaking to himself and so sparing
the explorer the shame of hearing self-evident matters explained. "But he must have
had some chance of defending himself," said the explorer, and rose from his seat.
 The officer realized that he was in danger of having his exposition of the
apparatus held up for a long time; so he went up to the explorer, took him by the arm,
waved a hand toward the condemned man, who was standing very straight now that
he had so obviously become the center of attention -- the soldier had also given the
chain a jerk -- and said: "This is how the matter stands. I have been appointed judge in
this penal colony. Despite my youth. For I was the former Commandant's assistant in
all penal matters and know more about the apparatus than anyone. My guiding
principle is this: Guilt is never to be doubted. Other courts cannot follow that
principle, for they consist of several opinions and have higher courts to scrutinize
them. That is not the case here, or at least, it was not the case in the former
Commandant's time. The new man has certainly shown some inclination to interfere
$ 170
with my judgments, but so far I have succeeded in fending him off and will go on
succeeding. You wanted to have the case explained; it is quite simple, like all of them.
A captain reported to me this morning that this man, who had been assigned to him as
a servant and sleeps before his door, had been asleep on duty. It is his duty, you see, to
get up every time the hour strikes and salute the captain's door. Not an exacting duty,
and very necessary, since he has to be a sentry as well as a servant, and must be alert in
both functions. Last night the captain wanted to see if the man was doing his duty. He
opened the door as the clock struck two and there was his man curled up asleep. He
took his riding whip and lashed him across the face. Instead of getting up and begging
pardon, the man caught hold of his master's legs, shook him, and cried: 'Throw that
whip away or I'll eat you alive.' -- That's the evidence. The captain came to me an hour
ago, I wrote down his statement and appended the sentence to it. Then I had the man
put in chains. That was all quite simple. If I had first called the man before me and
interrogated him, things would have got into a confused tangle. He would have told
lies, and had I exposed these lies he would have backed them up with more lies, and so
on and so forth. As it is, I've got him and I won't let him go. -- Is that quite clear now?
But we're wasting time, the execution should be beginning and I haven't finished
explaining the apparatus yet." He pressed the explorer back into his chair, went up
again to the apparatus, and began: "As you see, the shape of the Harrow corresponds
to the human form; here is the harrow for the torso, here are the harrows for the legs.
For the head there is only this one small spike. Is that quite clear?" He bent amiably
forward toward the explorer, eager to provide the most comprehensive explanations.
 The explorer considered the Harrow with a frown. The explanation of the
judicial procedure had not satisfied him. He had to remind himself that this was in any
case a penal colony where extraordinary measures were needed and that military
discipline must be enforced to the last. He also felt that some hope might be set on the
new Commandant, who was apparently of a mind to bring in, although gradually, a
new kind of procedure which the officer's narrow mind was incapable of
understanding. This train of thought prompted his next question: "Will the
$ 171
Commandant attend the execution?" "It is not certain," said the officer, wincing at the
direct question, and his friendly expression darkened. "That is just why we have to lose
no time. Much as I dislike it, I shall have to cut my explanations short. But of course
tomorrow, when the apparatus has been cleaned -- its one drawback is that it gets so
messy -- I can recapitulate all the details. For the present, then, only the essentials. --
When the man lies down on the Bed and it begins to vibrate, the Harrow is lowered
onto his body. It regulates itself automatically so that the needles barely touch his skin;
once contact is made the steel ribbon stiffens immediately into a rigid band. And then
the performance begins. An ignorant onlooker would see no difference between one
punishment and another. The Harrow appears to do its work with uniform regularity.
As it quivers, its points pierce the skin of the body which is itself quivering from the
vibration of the Bed. So that the actual progress of the sentence can be watched, the
Harrow is made of glass. Getting the needles fixed in the glass was a technical
problem, but after many experiments we overcame the difficulty. No trouble was too
great for us to take, you see. And now anyone can look through the glass and watch
the inscription taking form on the body. Wouldn't you care to come a little nearer and
have a look at the needles?"
 The explorer got up slowly, walked across, and bent over the Harrow. "You
see," said the officer, "there are two kinds of needles arranged in multiple patterns.
Each long needle has a short one beside it. The long needle does the writing, and the
short needle sprays a jet of water to wash away the blood and keep the inscription
clear. Blood and water together are then conducted here through small runnels into
this main runnel and down a waste pipe into the pit." With his finger the officer traced
the exact course taken by the blood and water. To make the picture as vivid as possible
he held both hands below the outlet of the waste pipe as if to catch the outflow, and
when he did this the explorer drew back his head and feeling behind him with one
hand sought to return to his chair. To his horror he found that the condemned man
too had obeyed the officer's invitation to examine the Harrow at close quarters and
had followed him. He had pulled forward the sleepy soldier with the chain and was
$ 172
bending over the glass. One could see that his uncertain eyes were trying to perceive
what the two gentlemen had been looking at, but since he had not understood the
explanation he could not make head or tail of it. He was peering this way and that way.
He kept running his eyes along the glass. The explorer wanted to drive him away, since
what he was doing was probably culpable. But the officer firmly restrained the
explorer with one hand and with the other took a clod of earth from the rampart and
threw it at the soldier. He opened his eyes with a jerk, saw what the condemned man
had dared to do, let his rifle fall, dug his heels into the ground, dragged his prisoner
back so that he stumbled and fell immediately, and then stood looking down at him,
watching him struggling and rattling in his chains. "Set him on his feet!" yelled the
officer, for he noticed that the explorer's attention was being too much distracted by
the prisoner. In fact he was even leaning right across the Harrow, without taking any
notice of it, intent only on finding out what was happening to the prisoner. "Be careful
with him!" cried the officer again. He ran around the apparatus, himself caught the
condemned man under the shoulders, and with the soldier's help got him up on his
feet, which kept slithering from under him.
 "Now I know all about it," said the explorer as the officer came back to him.
"All except the most important thing," he answered, seizing the explorer's arm and
pointing upwards: "In the Designer are all the cogwheels that control the movements
of the Harrow, and this machinery is regulated according to the inscription demanded
by the sentence. I am still using the guiding plans drawn by the former Commandant.
Here they are" -- he extracted some sheets from the leather wallet -- "but I'm sorry I
can't let you handle them, they are my most precious possessions. Just take a seat and
I'll hold them in front of you like this, then you'll be able to see everything quite well."
He spread out the first sheet of paper. The explorer would have liked to say something
appreciative, but all he could see was a labyrinth of lines crossing and recrossing each
other, which covered the paper so thickly that it was difficult to discern the blank
spaces between them. "Read it," said the officer. "I can't," said the explorer. "Yet it's
clear enough," said the officer. "It's very ingenious," said the explorer evasively, "but I
$ 173
can't make it out." "Yes," said the officer with a laugh, putting the paper away again,
"it's no calligraphy for school children. It needs to be studied closely. I'm quite sure
that in the end you would understand it too. Of course the script can't be a simple one;
it's not supposed to kill a man straight off, but only after an interval of, on an average,
twelve hours; the turning point is reckoned to come at the sixth hour. So there have to
be lots and lots of flourishes around the actual script; the script itself runs around the
body only in a narrow girdle; the rest of the body is reserved for the embellishments.
Can you appreciate now the work accomplished by the Harrow and the whole
apparatus? -- Just watch it!" He ran up the ladder, turned a wheel, called down: "Look
out, keep to one side!" and everything started working. If the wheel had not creaked, it
would have been marvelous. The officer, as if surprised by the noise of the wheel,
shook his fist at it, then spread out his arms in excuse to the explorer, and climbed
down rapidly to peer at the working of the machine from below. Something
perceptible to no one save himself was still not in order; he clambered up again, did
something with both hands in the interior of the Designer, then slid down one of the
rods, instead of using the ladder, so as to get down quicker, and with the full force of
his lungs, to make himself heard at all in the noise, yelled in the explorer's ear: "Can
you follow it? The Harrow is beginning to write; when it finishes the first draft of the
inscription on the man's back, the layer of cotton wool begins to roll and slowly turns
the body over, to give the Harrow fresh space for writing. Meanwhile the raw part that
has been written on lies on the cotton wool, which is specially prepared to staunch the
bleeding and so makes all ready for a new deepening of the script. Then these teeth at
the edge of the Harrow, as the body turns further around, tear the cotton wool away
from the wounds, throw it into the pit, and there is more work for the Harrow. So it
keeps on writing deeper and deeper for the whole twelve hours. The first six hours the
condemned man stays alive almost as before, he suffers only pain. After two hours the
felt gag is taken away, for he has no longer strength to scream. Here, into this
electrically heated basin at the head of the Bed, some warm rice pap is poured, from
which the man, if he feels like it, can take as much as his tongue can lap. Not one of
them ever misses the chance. I can remember none, and my experience is extensive.
$ 174
Only about the sixth hour does the man lose all desire to eat. I usually kneel down here
at that moment and observe what happens. The man rarely swallows his last mouthful,
he only rolls it around his mouth and spits it out into the pit. I have to duck just then
or he would spit it in my face. But how quiet he grows at just about the sixth hour!
Enlightenment comes to the most dull-witted. It begins around the eyes. From there it
radiates. A moment that might tempt one to get under the Harrow oneself. Nothing
more happens than that the man begins to understand the inscription, he purses his
mouth as if he were listening. You have seen how difficult it is to decipher the script
with one's eyes; but our man deciphers it with his wounds. To be sure, that is a hard
task; he needs six hours to accomplish it. By that time the Harrow has pierced him
quite through and casts him into the pit, where he pitches down upon the blood and
water and the cotton wool. Then the judgment has been fulfilled, and we, the soldier
and I, bury him."
 The explorer had inclined his ear to the officer and with his hands in his jacket
pockets watched the machine at work. The condemned man watched it too, but
uncomprehendingly. He bent forward a little and was intent on the moving needles
when the soldier, at a sign from the officer, slashed through his shirt and trousers from
behind with a knife, so that they fell off; he tried to catch at his falling clothes to cover
his nakedness, but the soldier lifted him into the air and shook the last remnants from
him. The officer stopped the machine, and in the sudden silence the condemned man
was laid under the Harrow. The chains were loosened and the straps fastened on
instead; in the first moment that seemed almost a relief to the prisoner. And now the
Harrow was adjusted a little lower, since he was a thin man. When the needle points
touched him a shudder ran over his skin; while the soldier was busy strapping his right
hand, he flung out his left hand blindly; but it happened to be in the direction toward
where the explorer was standing. The officer kept watching the explorer sideways, as if
seeking to read from his face the impression made on him by the execution, which had
been at least cursorily explained to him.
$ 175
 The wrist strap broke; probably the soldier had drawn it too tight. The officer
had to intervene, the soldier held up the broken piece of strap to show him. So the
officer went over to him and said, his face still turned toward the explorer: "This is a
very complex machine, it can't be helped that things are breaking or giving way here
and there; but one must not thereby allow oneself to be diverted in one's general
judgment. In any case, this strap is easily made good; I shall simply use a chain; the
delicacy of the vibrations for the right arm will of course be a little impaired." And
while he fastened the chains, he added: "The resources for maintaining the machine
are now very much reduced. Under the former Commandant I had free access to a
sum of money set aside entirely for this purpose. There was a store, too, in which spare
parts were kept for repairs of all kinds. I confess I have been almost prodigal with
them, I mean in the past, not now as the new Commandant pretends, always looking
for an excuse to attack our old way of doing things. Now he has taken charge of the
machine money himself, and if I send for a new strap they ask for the broken old strap
as evidence, and the new strap takes ten days to appear and then is of shoddy material
and not much good. But how I am supposed to work the machine without a strap,
that's something nobody bothers about."
 The explorer thought to himself: It's always a ticklish matter to intervene
decisively in other people's affairs. He was neither a member of the penal colony nor a
citizen of the state to which it belonged. Were he to denounce this execution or
actually try to stop it, they could say to him: You are a foreigner, mind your own
business. He could make no answer to that, unless he were to add that he was amazed
at himself in this connection, for he traveled only as an observer, with no intention at
all of altering other people's methods of administering justice. Yet here he found
himself strongly tempted. The injustice of the procedure and the inhumanity of the
execution were undeniable. No one could suppose that he had any selfish interest in
the matter, for the condemned man was a complete stranger, not a fellow countryman
or even at all sympathetic to him. The explorer himself had recommendations from
high quarters, had been received here with great courtesy, and the very fact that he
$ 176
had been invited to attend the execution seemed to suggest that his views would be
welcome. And this was all the more likely since the Commandant, as he had heard
only too plainly, was no upholder of the procedure and maintained an attitude almost
of hostility to the officer.
 At that moment the explorer heard the officer cry out in rage. He had just, with
considerable difficulty, forced the felt gag into the condemned man's mouth when the
man in an irresistible access of nausea shut his eyes and vomited. Hastily the officer
snatched him away from the gag and tried to hold his head over the pit; but it was too
late, the vomit was running all over the machine. "It's all the fault of that
Commandant!" cried the officer, senselessly shaking the brass rods in front, "the
machine is befouled like a pigsty." With trembling hands he indicated to the explorer
what had happened. "Have I not tried for hours at a time to get the Commandant to
understand that the prisoner must fast for a whole day before the execution. But our
new, mild doctrine thinks otherwise. The Commandant's ladies stuff the man with
sugar candy before he's led off. He has lived on stinking fish his whole life long and
now he has to eat sugar candy! But it could still be possible, I should have nothing to
say against it, but why won't they get me a new felt gag, which I have been begging for
the last three months. How should a man not feel sick when he takes a felt gag into his
mouth which more than a hundred men have already slobbered and gnawed in their
dying moments?"
 The condemned man had laid his head down and looked peaceful, the soldier
was busy trying to clean the machine with the prisoner's shirt. The officer advanced
toward the explorer who in some vague presentiment fell back a pace, but the officer
seized him by the hand, and drew him to one side. "I should like to exchange a few
words with you in confidence," he said, "may I?" "Of course," said the explorer, and
listened with downcast eyes.
 "This procedure and method of execution, which you are now having the
$ 177
opportunity to admire, has at the moment no longer any open adherents in our
colony. I am its sole advocate, and at the same time the sole advocate of the old
Commandant's tradition. I can no longer reckon on any further extension of the
method, it takes all my energy to maintain it as it is. During the old Commandant's
lifetime the colony was full of his adherents; his strength of conviction I still have in
some measure, but not an atom of his power; consequently the adherents have skulked
out of sight, there are still many of them but none of them will admit it. If you were to
go into the teahouse today, on execution day, and listen to what is being said, you
would perhaps hear only ambiguous remarks. These would all be made by adherents,
but under the present Commandant and his present doctrines they are of no use to
me. And now I ask you: because of this Commandant and the women who influence
him, is such a piece of work, the work of a lifetime" -- he pointed to the machine -- "to
perish? Ought one to let that happen? Even if one has only come as a stranger to our
island for a few days? But there's no time to lose, an attack of some kind is impending
on my function as judge; conferences are already being held in the Commandant's
office from which I am excluded; even your coming here today seems to me a
significant move; they are cowards and use you as a screen, you, a stranger. -- How
different an execution was in the old days! A whole day before the ceremony the valley
was packed with people; they all came only to look on; early in the morning the
Commandant appeared with his ladies; fanfares roused the whole camp; I reported
that everything was in readiness; the assembled company -- no high official dared to
absent himself -- arranged itself around the machine; this pile of cane chairs is a
miserable survival from that epoch. The machine was freshly cleaned and glittering, I
got new spare parts for almost every execution. Before hundreds of spectators -- all of
them standing on tiptoe as far as the heights there -- the condemned man was laid
under the Harrow by the Commandant himself. What is left today for a common
soldier to do was then my task, the task of the presiding judge, and was an honor for
me. And then the execution began! No discordant noise spoiled the working of the
machine. Many did not care to watch it but lay with closed eyes in the sand; they all
knew: Now Justice is being done. In the silence one heard nothing but the condemned
$ 178
man's sighs, half-muffled by the felt gag. Nowadays the machine can no longer wring
from anyone a sigh louder than the felt gag can stifle; but in those days the writing
needles let drop an acid fluid, which we're no longer permitted to use. Well, and then
came the sixth hour! It was impossible to grant all the requests to be allowed to watch
it from nearby. The Commandant in his wisdom ordained that the children should
have the preference; I, of course, because of my office had the privilege of always being
at hand; often enough I would be squatting there with a small child in either arm. How
we all absorbed the look of transfiguration on the face of the sufferer, how we bathed
our cheeks in the radiance of that justice, achieved at last and fading so quickly! What
times these were, my comrade!" The officer had obviously forgotten whom he was
addressing; he had embraced the explorer and laid his head on his shoulder. The
explorer was deeply embarrassed, impatiently he stared over the officer's head. The
soldier had finished his cleaning job and was now pouring rice pap from a pot into the
basin. As soon as the condemned man, who seemed to have recovered entirely,
noticed this action he began to reach for the rice with his tongue. The soldier kept
pushing him away, since the rice pap was certainly meant for a later hour, yet it was
just as unfitting that the soldier himself should thrust his dirty hands into the basin
and eat out of it before the other's avid face.
 The officer quickly pulled himself together. "I didn't want to upset you," he
said, "I know it is impossible to make those days credible now. Anyhow, the machine is
still working and it is still effective in itself. It is effective in itself even though it stands
alone in this valley. And the corpse still falls at the last into the pit with an
incomprehensibly gentle wafting motion, even though there are no hundreds of people
swarming around like flies as formerly. In those days we had to put a strong fence
around the pit, it has long since been torn down."
 The explorer wanted to withdraw his face from the officer and looked around
him at random. The officer thought he was surveying the valley's desolation; so he
seized him by the hands, turned him around to meet his eyes, and asked: "Do you
$ 179
realize the shame of it?"
 But the explorer said nothing. The officer left him alone for a little; with legs
apart, hands on hips, he stood very still, gazing at the ground. Then he smiled
encouragingly at the explorer and said: "I was quite near you yesterday when the
Commandant gave you the invitation. I heard him giving it. I know the Commandant.
I divined at once what he was after. Although he is powerful enough to take measures
against me, he doesn't dare to do it yet, but he certainly means to use your verdict
against me, the verdict of an illustrious foreigner. He has calculated it carefully: this is
your second day on the island, you did not know the old Commandant and his ways,
you are conditioned by European ways of thought, perhaps you object on principle to
capital punishment in general and to such mechanical instruments of death in
particular, besides you will see that the execution has no support from the public, a
shabby ceremony -- carried out with a machine already somewhat old and worn-now,
taking all that into consideration, would it not be likely (so thinks the Commandant)
that you might disapprove of my methods? And if you disapprove, you wouldn't
conceal the fact (I'm still speaking from the Commandant's point of view), for you are
a man to feel confidence in your own well-tried conclusions. True, you have seen and
learned to appreciate the peculiarities of many peoples, and so you would not be likely
to take a strong line against our proceedings, as you might do in your own country.
But the Commandant has no need of that. A casual, even an unguarded remark will be
enough. It doesn't even need to represent what you really think, so long as it can be
used speciously to serve his purpose. He will try to prompt you with sly questions, of
that I am certain. And his ladies will sit around you and prick up their ears; you might
be saying something like this: 'In our country we have a different criminal procedure,'
or 'In our country the prisoner is interrogated before he is sentenced,' or 'We haven't
used torture since the Middle Ages.' All these statements are as true as they seem
natural to you, harmless remarks that pass no judgment on my methods. But how
would the Commandant react to them? I can see him, our good Commandant,
pushing his chair away immediately and rushing onto the balcony, I can see his ladies
$ 180
streaming out after him, I can hear his voice -- the ladies call it a voice of thunder --
well, and this is what he says: 'A famous Western investigator, sent out to study
criminal procedure in all the countries of the world, has just said that our old tradition
of administering justice is inhumane. Such a verdict from such a personality makes it
impossible for me to countenance these methods any longer. Therefore from this very
day I ordain. . .' and so on. You may want to interpose that you never said any such
thing, that you never called my methods inhumane, on the contrary your profound
experience leads you to believe they are most humane and most in consonance with
human dignity, and you admire the machine greatly -- but it will be too late; you won't
even get onto the balcony, crowded as it will be with ladies; you may try to draw
attention to yourself; you may want to scream out; but a lady's hand will close your lips
-- and I and the work of the old Commandant will be done for."
 The explorer had to suppress a smile; so easy, then, was the task he had felt to
be so difficult. He said evasively: "You overestimate my influence; the Commandant
has read my letters of recommendation, he knows that I am no expert in criminal
procedure. If I were to give an opinion, it would be as a private individual, an opinion
no more influential than that of any ordinary person, and in any case much less
influential than that of the Commandant, who, I am given to understand, has very
extensive powers in this penal colony. If his attitude to your procedure is as definitely
hostile as you believe, then I fear the end of your tradition is at hand, even without any
humble assistance from me."
 Had it dawned on the officer at last? No, he still did not understand. He shook
his head emphatically, glanced briefly around at the condemned man and the soldier,
who both flinched away from the rice, came close up to the explorer, and without
looking at his face but fixing his eye on some spot on his coat said in a lower voice
than before: "You don't know the Commandant; you feel yourself -- forgive the
expression -- a kind of outsider so far as all of us are concerned; yet, believe me, your
influence cannot be rated too highly. I was simply delighted when I heard that you
$ 181
were to attend the execution all by yourself. The Commandant arranged it to aim a
blow at me, but I shall turn it to my advantage. Without being distracted by lying
whispers and contemptuous glances -- which could not have been avoided had a
crowd of people attended the execution -- you have heard my explanations, seen the
machine, and are now in course of watching the execution. You have doubtless already
formed your own judgment; if you still have some small uncertainties the sight of the
execution will resolve them. And now I make this request to you: help me against the
Commandant!"
 The explorer would not let him go on. "How could I do that," he cried, "it's
quite impossible. I can neither help nor hinder you."
 "Yes, you can," the officer said. The explorer saw with a certain apprehension
that the officer had clenched his fists. "Yes, you can," repeated the officer, still more
insistently. "I have a plan that is bound to succeed. You believe your influence is
insufficient. I know that it is sufficient. But even granted that you are right, is it not
necessary, for the sake of preserving this tradition, to try even what might prove
insufficient? Listen to my plan, then. The first thing necessary for you to carry it out is
to be as reticent as possible today regarding your verdict on these proceedings. Unless
you are asked a direct question you must say nothing at all; but what you do say must
be brief and general; let it be remarked that you would prefer not to discuss the
matter, that you are out of patience with it, that if you are to let yourself go you would
use strong language. I don't ask you to tell any lies; by no means; you should only give
curt answers, such as: 'Yes, I saw the execution,' or 'Yes, I had it explained to me.' Just
that, nothing more. There are grounds enough for any impatience you betray,
although not such as will occur to the Commandant. Of course, he will mistake your
meaning and interpret it to please himself. That's what my plan depends on.
Tomorrow in the Commandant's office there is to be a large conference of all the high
administrative officials, the Commandant presiding. Of course the Commandant is the
kind of man to have turned these conferences into public spectacles. He has had a
$ 182
gallery built that is always packed with spectators. I am compelled to take part in the
conferences, but they make me sick with disgust. Now, whatever happens, you will
certainly be invited to this conference; if you behave today as I suggest, the invitation
will become an urgent request. But if for some mysterious reason you're not invited,
you'll have to ask for an invitation; there's no doubt of your getting it then. So
tomorrow you're sitting in the Commandant's box with the ladies. He keeps looking
up to make sure you're there. After various trivial and ridiculous matters, brought in
merely to impress the audience -- mostly harbor works, nothing but harbor works! --
our judicial procedure comes up for discussion too. If the Commandant doesn't
introduce it, or not soon enough, I'll see that it's mentioned. I'll stand up and report
that today's execution has taken place. Quite briefly, only a statement. Such a
statement is not usual, but I shall make it. The Commandant thanks me, as always,
with an amiable smile, and then he can't restrain himself, he seizes the excellent
opportunity. 'It has just been reported,' he will say, or words to that effect, 'that an
execution has taken place. I should like merely to add that this execution was
witnessed by the famous explorer who has, as you all know, honored our colony so
greatly by his visit to us. His presence at today's session of our conference also
contributes to the importance of this occasion. Should we not now ask the famous
explorer to give us his verdict on our traditional mode of execution and the procedure
that leads up to it?' Of course there is loud applause, general agreement, I am more
insistent than anyone. The Commandant bows to you and says: 'Then in the name of
the assembled company, I put the question to you.' And now you advance to the front
of the box. Lay your hands where everyone can see them, or the ladies will catch them
and press your fingers. -- And then at last you can speak out. I don't know how I'm
going to endure the tension of waiting for that moment. Don't put any restraint on
yourself when you make your speech, publish the truth aloud, lean over the front of
the box, shout, yes indeed, shout your verdict, your unshakable conviction, at the
Commandant. Yet perhaps you wouldn't care to do that, it's not in keeping with your
character, in your country perhaps people do these things differently, well, that's all
right too, that will be quite as effective, don't even stand up, just say a few words, even
$ 183
in a whisper, so that only the officials beneath you will hear them, that will be quite
enough, you don't even need to mention the lack of public support for the execution,
the creaking wheel, the broken strap, the filthy gag of felt, no, I'll take all that upon me,
and, believe me, if my indictment doesn't drive him out of the conference hall, it will
force him to his knees to make the acknowledgment: Old Commandant, I humble
myself before you. -- That is my plan; will you help me to carry it out? But of course
you are willing, what is more, you must." And the officer seized the explorer by both
arms and gazed, breathing heavily, into his face. He had shouted the last sentence so
loudly that even the soldier and the condemned man were startled into attending; they
had not understood a word but they stopped eating and looked over at the explorer,
chewing their previous mouthfuls.
 From the very beginning the explorer had no doubt about what answer he must
give; in his lifetime he had experienced too much to have any uncertainty here; he was
fundamentally honorable and unafraid. And yet now, facing the soldier and the
condemned man, he did hesitate, for as long as it took to draw one breath. At last,
however, he said, as he had to: "No." The officer blinked several times but did not turn
his eyes away. "Would you like me to explain?" asked the explorer. The officer nodded
wordlessly. "I do not approve of your procedure," said the explorer then, "even before
you took me into your confidence -- of course I shall never in any circumstances
betray your confidence -- I was already wondering whether it would be my duty to
intervene and whether my intervention would have the slightest chance of success. I
realized to whom I ought to turn: to the Commandant, of course. You have made that
fact even clearer, but without having strengthened my resolution, on the contrary,
your sincere conviction has touched me, even though it cannot influence my
judgment."
 The officer remained mute, turned to the machine, caught hold of a brass rod,
and then, leaning back a little, gazed at the Designer as if to assure himself that all was
in order. The soldier and the condemned man seemed to have come to some
$ 184
understanding; the condemned man was making signs to the soldier, difficult though
his movements were because of the tight straps; the soldier was bending down to him;
the condemned man whispered something and the soldier nodded.
 The explorer followed the officer and said: "You don't know yet what I mean to
do. I shall tell the Commandant what I think of the procedure, certainly, but not at a
public conference, only in private; nor shall I stay here long enough to attend any
conference; I am going away early tomorrow morning, or at least embarking on my
ship."
 It did not look as if the officer had been listening. "So you did not find the
procedure convincing," he said to himself and smiled, as an old man smiles at childish
nonsense and yet pursues his own meditations behind the smile.
 "Then the time has come," he said at last, and suddenly looked at the explorer
with bright eyes that held some challenge, some appeal for cooperation. "The time for
what?" asked the explorer uneasily, but got no answer.
 "You are free," said the officer to the condemned man in the native tongue. The
man did not believe it at first. "Yes, you are set free," said the officer. For the first time
the condemned man's face woke to real animation. Was it true? Was it only a caprice
of the officer's, that might change again? Had the foreign explorer begged him off?
What was it? One could read these questions on his face. But not for long. Whatever it
might be, he wanted to be really free if he might, and he began to struggle so far as the
Harrow permitted him.
 "You'll burst my straps," cried the officer, "lie still! We'll soon loosen them."
And signing the soldier to help him, he set about doing so. The condemned man
laughed wordlessly to himself, now he turned his face left toward the officer, now right
toward the soldier, nor did he forget the explorer.
$ 185
 "Draw him out," ordered the officer. Because of the Harrow this had to be done
with some care. The condemned man had already torn himself a little in the back
through his impatience.
 From now on, however, the officer paid hardly any attention to him. He went
up to the explorer, pulled out the small leather wallet again, turned over the papers in
it, found the one he wanted, and showed it to the explorer. "Read it," he said. "I can't,"
said the explorer, "I told you before that I can't make out these scripts." "Try taking a
close look at it," said the officer and came quite near to the explorer so that they might
read it together. But when even that proved useless, he outlined the script with his
little finger, holding it high above the paper as if the surface dared not be sullied by
touch, in order to help the explorer to follow the script in that way. The explorer did
make an effort, meaning to please the officer in this respect at least, but he was quite
unable to follow. Now the officer began to spell it, letter by letter, and then read out
the words. " 'BE JUST!' is what is written there," he said, "surely you can read it now."
The explorer bent so close to the paper that the officer feared he might touch it and
drew it farther away; the explorer made no remark, yet it was clear that he still could
not decipher it. " 'BE JUST!' is what is written there," said the officer once more.
"Maybe," said the explorer, "I am prepared to believe you." "Well, then," said the
officer, at least partly satisfied, and climbed up the ladder with the paper; very carefully
he laid it inside the Designer and seemed to be changing the disposition of all the
cogwheels; it was a troublesome piece of work and must have involved wheels that
were extremely small, for sometimes the officer's head vanished altogether from sight
inside the Designer, so precisely did he have to regulate the machinery.
 The explorer, down below, watched the labor uninterruptedly, his neck grew
stiff and his eyes smarted from the glare of sunshine over the sky. The soldier and the
condemned man were now busy together. The man's shirt and trousers, which were
already lying in the pit, were fished out by the point of the soldier's bayonet. The shirt
was abominably dirty and its owner washed it in the bucket of water. When he put on
$ 186
the shirt and trousers both he and the soldier could not help guffawing, for the
garments were of course slit up behind. Perhaps the condemned man felt it incumbent
on him to amuse the soldier, he turned around and around in his slashed garments
before the soldier, who squatted on the ground beating his knees with mirth. All the
same, they presently controlled their mirth out of respect for the gentlemen.
 When the officer had at length finished his task aloft, he surveyed the
machinery in all its details once more, with a smile, but this time shut the lid of the
Designer, which had stayed open till now, climbed down, looked into the pit and then
at the condemned man, noting with satisfaction that the clothing had been taken out,
then went over to wash his hands in the water bucket, perceived too late that it was
disgustingly dirty, was unhappy because he could not wash his hands, in the end thrust
them into the sand -- this alternative did not please him, but he had to put up with it --
then stood upright and began to unbutton his uniform jacket. As he did this, the two
ladies' handkerchiefs he had tucked under his collar fell into his hands. "Here are your
handkerchiefs," he said, and threw them to the condemned man. And to the explorer
he said in explanation: "A gift from the ladies."
 In spite of the obvious haste with which he was discarding first his uniform
jacket and then all his clothing, he handled each garment with loving care, he even ran
his fingers caressingly over the silver lace on the jacket and shook a tassel into place.
This loving care was certainly out of keeping with the fact that as soon as he had a
garment off he flung it at once with a kind of unwilling jerk into the pit. The last thing
left to him was his short sword with the sword belt. He drew it out of the scabbard,
broke it, then gathered all together, the bits of the sword, the scabbard, and the belt,
and flung them so violently down that they clattered into the pit.
 Now he stood naked there. The explorer bit his lips and said nothing. He knew
very well what was going to happen, but he had no right to obstruct the officer in
anything. If the judicial procedure which the officer cherished were really so near its
$ 187
end -- possibly as a result of his own intervention, as to which he felt himself pledged -
- then the officer was doing the right thing; in his place the explorer would not have
acted otherwise.
 The soldier and the condemned man did not understand at first what was
happening, at first they were not even looking on. The condemned man was gleeful at
having got the handkerchiefs back, but he was not allowed to enjoy them for long,
since the soldier snatched them with a sudden, unexpected grab. Now the condemned
man in turn was trying to twitch them from under the belt where the soldier had
tucked them, but the soldier was on his guard. So they were wrestling, half in jest.
Only when the officer stood quite naked was their attention caught. The condemned
man especially seemed struck with the notion that some great change was impending.
What had happened to him was now going to happen to the officer. Perhaps even to
the very end. Apparently the foreign explorer had given the order for it. So this was
revenge. Although he himself had not suffered to the end, he was to be revenged to the
end. A broad, silent grin now appeared on his face and stayed there all the rest of the
time.
 The officer, however, had turned to the machine. It had been clear enough
previously that he understood the machine well, but now it was almost staggering to
see how he managed it and how it obeyed him. His hand had only to approach the
Harrow for it to rise and sink several times till it was adjusted to the right position for
receiving him; he touched only the edge of the Bed and already it was vibrating; the
felt gag came to meet his mouth, one could see that the officer was really reluctant to
take it but he shrank from it only a moment, soon he submitted and received it.
Everything was ready, only the straps hung down at the sides, yet they were obviously
unnecessary, the officer did not need to be fastened down. Then the condemned man
noticed the loose straps, in his opinion the execution was incomplete unless the straps
were buckled, he gestured eagerly to the soldier and they ran together to strap the
officer down. The latter had already stretched out one foot to push the lever that
$ 188
started the Designer; he saw the two men coming up; so he drew his foot back and let
himself be buckled in. But now he could not reach the lever; neither the soldier nor the
condemned man would be able to find it, and the explorer was determined not to lift a
finger. It was not necessary; as soon as the straps were fastened the machine began to
work; the Bed vibrated, the needles flickered above the skin, the Harrow rose and fell.
The explorer had been staring at it quite a while before he remembered that a wheel in
the Designer should have been creaking; but everything was quiet, not even the
slightest hum could be heard.
 Because it was working so silently the machine simply escaped one's attention.
The explorer observed the soldier and the condemned man. The latter was the more
animated of the two, everything in the machine interested him, now he was bending
down and now stretching up on tiptoe, his forefinger was extended all the time
pointing out details to the soldier. This annoyed the explorer. He was resolved to stay
till the end, but he could not bear the sight of these two. "Go back home," he said. The
soldier would have been willing enough, but the condemned man took the order as a
punishment. With clasped hands he implored to be allowed to stay, and when the
explorer shook his head and would not relent, he even went down on his knees. The
explorer saw that it was no use merely giving orders, he was on the point of going over
and driving them away. At that moment he heard a noise above him in the Designer.
He looked up. Was that cogwheel going to make trouble after all? But it was
something quite different. Slowly the lid of the Designer rose up and then clicked wide
open. The teeth of a cogwheel showed themselves and rose higher, soon the whole
wheel was visible, it was as if some enormous force were squeezing the Designer so
that there was no longer room for the wheel, the wheel moved up till it came to the
very edge of the Designer, fell down, rolled along the sand a little on its rim, and then
lay flat. But a second wheel was already rising after it, followed by many others, large
and small and indistinguishably minute, the same thing happened to all of them, at
every moment one imagined the Designer must now really be empty, but another
complex of numerous wheels was already rising into sight, falling down, trundling
$ 189
along the sand, and lying flat. This phenomenon made the condemned man
completely forget the explorer's command, the cogwheels fascinated him, he was
always trying to catch one and at the same time urging the soldier to help, but always
drew back his hand in alarm, for another wheel always came hopping along which, at
least on its first advance, scared him off.
 The explorer, on the other hand, felt greatly troubled; the machine was
obviously going to pieces; its silent working was a delusion; he had a feeling that he
must now stand by the officer, since the officer was no longer able to look after
himself. But while the tumbling cogwheels absorbed his whole attention he had
forgotten to keep an eye on the rest of the machine; now that the last cogwheel had
left the Designer, however, he bent over the Harrow and had a new and still more
unpleasant surprise. The Harrow was not writing, it was only jabbing, and the Bed was
not turning the body over but only bringing it up quivering against the needles. The
explorer wanted to do something, if possible, to bring the whole machine to a
standstill, for this was no exquisite torture such as the officer desired, this was plain
murder. He stretched out his hands. But at that moment the Harrow rose with the
body spitted on it and moved to the side, as it usually did only when the twelfth hour
had come. Blood was flowing in a hundred streams, not mingled with water, the water
jets too had failed to function. And now the last action failed to fulfill itself, the body
did not drop off the long needles, streaming with blood it went on hanging over the pit
without falling into it. The Harrow tried to move back to its old position, but as if it
had itself noticed that it had not yet got rid of its burden it stuck after all where it was,
over the pit. "Come and help!" cried the explorer to the other two, and himself seized
the officer's feet. He wanted to push against the feet while the others seized the head
from the opposite side and so the officer might be slowly eased off the needles. But the
other two could not make up their minds to come; the condemned man actually
turned away; the explorer had to go over to them and force them into position at the
officer's head. And here, almost against his will, he had to look at the face of the
corpse. It was as it had been in life; no sign was visible of the promised redemption;
$ 190
what the others had found in the machine the officer had not found; the lips were
firmly pressed together, the eyes were open, with the same expression as in life, the
look was calm and convinced, through the forehead went the point of the great iron
spike.
 As the explorer, with the soldier and the condemned man behind him, reached
the first houses of the colony, the soldier pointed to one of them and said: "There is
the teahouse."
 In the ground floor of the house was a deep, low, cavernous space, its walls and
ceiling blackened with smoke. It was open to the road all along its length. Although
this teahouse was very little different from the other houses of the colony, which were
all very dilapidated, even up to the Commandant's palatial headquarters, it made on
the explorer the impression of a historic tradition of some kind, and he felt the power
of past days. He went near to it, followed by his companions, right up between the
empty tables that stood in the street before it, and breathed the cool, heavy air that
came from the interior. "The old man's buried here," said the soldier, "the priest
wouldn't let him lie in the churchyard. Nobody knew where to bury him for a while,
but in the end they buried him here. The officer never told you about that, for sure,
because of course that's what he was most ashamed of. He even tried several times to
dig the old man up by night, but he was always chased away." "Where is the grave?"
asked the explorer, who found it impossible to believe the soldier. At once both of
them, the soldier and the condemned man, ran before him pointing with outstretched
hands in the direction where the grave should be. They led the explorer right up to the
back wall, where guests were sitting at a few tables. They were apparently dock
laborers, strong men with short, glistening, full black beards. None had a jacket, their
shirts were torn, they were poor, humble creatures. As the explorer drew near, some of
them got up, pressed close to the wall, and stared at him. "It's a foreigner," ran the
$ 191
whisper around him, "he wants to see the grave." They pushed one of the tables aside,
and under it there was really a gravestone. It was a simple stone, low enough to be
covered by a table. There was an inscription on it in very small letters, the explorer
had to kneel down to read it. This was what it said: "Here rests the old Commandant.
His adherents, who now must be nameless, have dug this grave and set up this stone.
There is a prophecy that after a certain number of years the Commandant will rise
again and lead his adherents from this house to recover the colony. Have faith and
wait!" When the explorer had read this and risen to his feet he saw all the bystanders
around him smiling, as if they too had read the inscription, had found it ridiculous,
and were expecting him to agree with them. The explorer ignored this, distributed a
few coins among them, waiting till the table was pushed over the grave again, quitted
the teahouse, and made for the harbor.
 The soldier and the condemned man had found some acquaintances in the
teahouse, who detained them. But they must have soon shaken them off, for the
explorer was only halfway down the long flight of steps leading to the boats when they
came rushing after him. Probably they wanted to force him at the last minute to take
them with him. While he was bargaining below with a ferryman to row him to the
steamer, the two of them came headlong down the steps, in silence, for they did not
dare to shout. But by the time they reached the foot of the steps the explorer was
already in the boat, and the ferryman was just casting off from the shore. They could
have jumped into the boat, but the explorer lifted a heavy knotted rope from the floor
boards, threatened them with it, and so kept them from attempting the leap.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 192
The Village Schoolmaster
[The Giant Mole]
 THOSE, and I am one of them, who find even a small ordinary-sized mole
disgusting, would probably have died of disgust if they had seen the giant mole that a
few years back was observed in the neighborhood of one of our villages, which
achieved a certain transitory celebrity on account of the incident. Today it has long
since sunk back into oblivion again, and in that only shares the obscurity of the whole
incident, which has remained quite inexplicable, but which people, it must be
confessed, have also taken no great pains to explain; and as a result of an
incomprehensible apathy in those very circles that should have concerned themselves
with it, and who in fact have shown enthusiastic interest in far more trifling matters,
the affair has been forgotten without ever being adequately investigated. In any case,
the fact that the village could not be reached by the railroad was no excuse. Many
people came from great distances out of pure curiosity, there were even foreigners
among them; it was only those who should have shown something more than curiosity
that refrained from coming. In fact, if a few quite simple people, people whose daily
work gave them hardly a moment of leisure -- if these people had not quite
disinterestedly taken up the affair, the rumor of this natural phenomenon would
probably have never spread beyond the locality. Indeed, rumor itself, which usually
cannot be held within bounds, was actually sluggish in this case; if it had not literally
been given a shove it would not have spread. But even that was no valid reason for
$ 193
refusing to inquire into the affair; on the contrary this second phenomenon should
have been investigated as well. Instead the old village schoolmaster was left to write
the sole account in black and white of the incident, and though he was an excellent
man in his own profession, neither his abilities nor his equipment made it possible for
him to produce an exhaustive description that could be used as a foundation by others,
far less, therefore, an actual explanation of the occurrence. His little pamphlet was
printed, and a good many copies were sold to visitors to the village about that time; it
also received some public recognition, but the teacher was wise enough to perceive
that his fragmentary labors, in which no one supported him, were basically without
value. If in spite of that he did not relax in them, and made the question his lifework,
though it naturally became more hopeless from year to year, that only shows on the
one hand how powerful an effect the appearance of the giant mole was capable of
producing, and on the other how much laborious effort and fidelity to his convictions
may be found in an old and obscure village schoolmaster. But that he suffered deeply
from the cold attitude of the recognized authorities is proved by a brief brochure with
which he followed up his pamphlet several years later, by which time hardly anyone
could remember what it was all about. In this brochure he complained of the lack of
understanding that he had encountered in people where it was least to be expected;
complaints that carried conviction less by the skill with which they were expressed
than by their honesty. Of such people he said very appositely: "It is not I, but they, who
talk like old village schoolmasters." And among other things he adduced the
pronouncement of a scholar to whom he had gone expressly about his affair. The
name of the scholar was not mentioned, but from various circumstances we could
guess who it was. After the teacher had managed with great difficulty to secure
admittance, he perceived at once from the very way in which he was greeted that the
savant had already acquired a rooted prejudice against the matter. The absentmindedness with which he listened to the long report which the teacher, pamphlet in
hand, delivered to him, can be gauged from a remark that he let fall after a pause for
ostensible reflection: "The soil in your neighborhood is particularly black and rich.
Consequently it provides the moles with particularly rich nourishment, and so they
$ 194
grow to an unusual size."
 "But not to such a size as that!" exclaimed the teacher, and he measured off two
yards on the wall, somewhat exaggerating the length of the mole in exasperation. "Oh,
and why not?" replied the scholar, who obviously looked upon the whole affair as a
great joke. With this verdict the teacher had to return to his home. He tells how his
wife and six children were waiting for him by the roadside in the snow, and how he
had to admit to them the final collapse of his hopes.
 When I read of the scholar's attitude toward the old man I was not yet
acquainted with the teacher's pamphlet. But I at once resolved myself to collect and
correlate all the information I could discover regarding the case. If I could not employ
physical force against the scholar, I could at least write a defense of the teacher, or
more exactly, of the good intentions of an honest but uninfluential man. I admit that I
rued this decision later, for I soon saw that its execution was bound to involve me in a
very strange predicament. On the one hand my own influence was far from sufficient
to effect a change in learned or even public opinion in the teacher's favor, while on the
other the teacher was bound to notice that I was less concerned with his main object,
which was to prove that the giant mole had actually been seen, than to defend his
honesty, which must naturally be self-evident to him and in need of no defense.
Accordingly, what was bound to happen was this: I would be misunderstood by the
teacher, though I wanted to collaborate with him, and instead of helping him I myself
would probably require support, which was most unlikely to appear. Besides, my
decision would impose a great burden of work upon me. If I wanted to convince
people I could not invoke the teacher, since he himself had not been able to convince
them. To read his pamphlet could only have led me astray, and so I refrained from
reading it until I should have finished my own labors. More, I did not even get in touch
with the teacher. True, he heard of my inquiries through intermediaries, but he did
not know whether I was working for him or against him. In fact he probably assumed
the latter, though he denied it later on; for I have proof of the fact that he put various
$ 195
obstacles in my way. It was quite easy for him to do that, for of course I was compelled
to undertake anew all the inquiries he had already made, and so he could always steal a
march on me. But that was the only objection that could be justly made to my method,
an unavoidable reproach, but one that was palliated by the caution and self-abnegation
with which I drew my conclusions. But for the rest my pamphlet was quite
uninfluenced by the teacher, perhaps on this point, indeed, I showed all too great a
scrupulosity; from my words one might have thought nobody had ever inquired into
the case before, and I was the first to interrogate those who had seen or heard of the
mole, the first to correlate the evidence, the first to draw conclusions. When later I
read the schoolmaster's pamphlet -- it had a very circumstantial title: "A mole, larger
in size than ever seen before" -- I found that we actually did not agree on certain
important points, though we both believed we had proved our main point, namely, the
existence of the mole. These differences prevented the establishment of the friendly
relations with the schoolmaster that I had been looking forward to in spite of
everything. On his side there developed a feeling almost of hostility. True, he was
always modest and humble in his bearing toward me, but that only made his real
feelings the more obvious. In other words, he was of the opinion that I had merely
damaged his credit, and that my belief that I had been or could be of assistance to him
was simplicity at best, but more likely presumption or artifice. He was particularly
fond of saying that all his previous enemies had shown their hostility either not at all,
or in private, or at most by word of mouth, while I had considered it necessary to have
my censures straightway published. Moreover, the few opponents of his who had
really occupied themselves with the subject, if but superficially, had at least listened to
his, the schoolmaster's, views before they had given expression to their own: while I,
on the strength of unsystematically assembled and in part misunderstood evidence,
had published conclusions which, even if they were correct as regarded the main
point, must evoke incredulity, and among the public no less than the educated. But the
faintest hint that the existence of the mole was unworthy of credence was the worst
thing that could happen in this case.
$ 196
 To these reproaches, veiled as they were, I could easily have found an answer --
for instance, that his own pamphlet achieved the very summit of the incredible -- it
was less easy, however, to make headway against his continual suspicion, and that was
the reason why I was very reserved in my dealings with him. For in his heart he was
convinced that I wanted to rob him of the fame of being the first man publicly to
vindicate the mole. Now of course he really enjoyed no fame whatever, but only an
absurd notoriety that was shrinking more and more, and for which I had certainly no
desire to compete. Besides, in the foreword to my pamphlet I had expressly declared
that the teacher must stand for all time as the discoverer of the mole -- and he was not
even that -- and that only my sympathy with his unfortunate fate had spurred me on
to write. "It is the aim of this pamphlet" -- so I ended up all too melodramatically, but
it corresponded with my feelings at that time -- "to help in giving the schoolmaster's
book the wide publicity it deserves. If I succeed in that, then may my name, which I
regard as only transiently and indirectly associated with this question, be blotted from
it at once." Thus I disclaimed expressly any major participation in the affair; it was
almost as if I had foreseen in some manner the teacher's unbelievable reproaches.
Nevertheless he found in that very passage a handle against me, and I do not deny that
there was a faint show of justice in what he said or rather hinted; indeed I was often
struck by the fact that he showed almost a keener penetration where I was concerned
than he had done in his pamphlet. For he maintained that my foreword was doublefaced. If I was really concerned solely to give publicity to his pamphlet, why had I not
occupied myself exclusively with him and his pamphlet, why had I not pointed out its
virtues, its irrefutability, why had I not confined myself to insisting on the significance
of the discovery and making that clear, why had I instead tackled the discovery itself,
while completely ignoring the pamphlet? Had not the discovery been made already?
Was there still anything left to be done in that direction? But if I really thought that it
was necessary for me to make the discovery all over again, why had I disassociated
myself from the discovery so solemnly in my foreword? One might put that down to
false modesty, but it was something worse. I was trying to belittle the discovery, I was
drawing attention to it merely for the purpose of depreciating it, while he on the other
$ 197
hand had inquired into and finally established it. Perhaps the affair had sunk
somewhat into desuetude; now I had made a noise about it again, but at the same time
I had made the schoolmaster's position more difficult than ever. What did he care
whether his honesty was vindicated or not? All that he was concerned with was the
thing itself, and with that alone. But I was only of disservice to it, for I did not
understand it, I did not prize it at its true value, I had no real feeling for it. It was
infinitely above my intellectual capacity. He sat before me and looked at me, his old
wrinkled face quite composed, and yet this was what he was thinking. Yet it was not
true that he was only concerned with the thing itself: actually he was very greedy for
fame, and wanted to make money out of the business too, which, however, considering
his large family, was very understandable. Nevertheless my interest in the affair
seemed so trivial compared with his own, that he felt he could claim to be completely
disinterested without deviating very seriously from the truth. And indeed my inner
doubts refused to be quite calmed by my telling myself that the man's reproaches were
really due to the fact that he clung to his mole, so to speak, with both hands, and was
bound to look upon anyone who laid even a finger on it as a traitor. For that was not
true; his attitude was not to be explained by greed, or at any rate by greed alone, but
rather by the touchiness which his great labors and their complete unsuccess had bred
in him. Yet even his touchiness did not explain everything. Perhaps my interest in the
affair was really too trivial. The schoolmaster was used to lack of interest in strangers.
He regarded it as a universal evil, but no longer suffered from its individual
manifestations. Now a man had appeared who, strangely enough, took up the affair;
and even he did not understand it. Attacked from this side I can make no defense. I am
no zoologist; yet perhaps I would have thrown myself into the case with my whole
heart if I had discovered it; but I had not discovered it. Such a gigantic mole is
certainly a prodigy, yet one cannot expect the continuous and undivided attention of
the whole world to be accorded it, particularly if its existence is not completely and
irrefutably established, and in any case it cannot be produced. And I admit too that
even if I had been the discoverer I would probably never have come forward so gladly
and voluntarily in defense of the mole as I had in that of the schoolmaster.
$ 198
 Now the misunderstanding between me and the schoolmaster would probably
have quickly cleared up if my pamphlet had achieved success. But success was not
forthcoming. Perhaps the book was not well enough written, not persuasive enough; I
am a businessman, it may be that the composition of such a pamphlet was still further
beyond my limited powers than those of the teacher, though in the kind of knowledge
required I was greatly superior to him. Besides, my unsuccess may be explicable in
other ways; the time at which the pamphlet appeared may have been inauspicious. The
discovery of the mole, which had failed to penetrate to a wide public at the time it took
place, was not so long past on the one hand as to be completely forgotten, and thus
capable of being brought alive again by my pamphlet, while on the other hand enough
time had elapsed quite to exhaust the trivial interest that had originally existed. Those
who took my pamphlet at all seriously told themselves, in that bored tone which from
the first had characterized the debate, that now the old useless labors on this
wearisome question were to begin all over again; and some even confused my
pamphlet with the schoolmaster's. In a leading agricultural journal appeared the
following comment, fortunately at the very end, and in small print: "The pamphlet on
the giant mole has once more been sent to us. Years ago we remember having had a
hearty laugh over it. Since then it has not become more intelligible, nor we more hard
of understanding. But we simply refuse to laugh at it a second time. Instead, we would
ask our teaching associations whether more useful work cannot be found for our
village schoolmasters than hunting out giant moles." An unpardonable confusion of
identity. They had read neither the first nor the second pamphlet, and the two
perfunctorily scanned expressions, "giant mole" and "village schoolmaster," were
sufficient for these gentlemen, as representatives of publicly esteemed interest, to
pronounce on the subject. Against this attack measures might have been attempted
and with success, but the lack of understanding between the teacher and myself kept
me from venturing upon them. I tried instead to keep the review from his knowledge
as long as I could. But he very soon discovered it, as I recognized from a sentence in
one of his letters, in which he announced his intention of visiting me for the Christmas
holidays. He wrote: "The world is full of malice, and people smooth the path for it," by
$ 199
which he wished to convey that I was one of the malicious, but, not content with my
own innate malice, wished also to make the world's path smooth for it: in other words,
was acting in such a way as to arouse the general malice and help it to victory. Well, I
summoned the resolution I required, and was able to await him calmly, and calmly
greet him when he arrived, this time a shade less polite in his bearing than usual; he
carefully drew out the journal from the breast pocket of his old-fashioned padded
overcoat, and opening it handed it to me. "I've seen it," I replied, handing the journal
back unread. "You've seen it," he said with a sigh; he had the old teacher's habit of
repeating the other person's answers. "Of course I won't take this lying down!" he went
on, tapping the journal excitedly with his finger and glancing up sharply at me, as if I
were of a different mind; he certainly had some idea of what I was about to say, for I
think I have noticed, not so much from his words as from other indications, that he
often has a genuine intuition of my intentions, though he never yields to them but lets
himself be diverted. What I said to him I can set down almost word for word, for I
made a note of it shortly after our interview. "Do what you like," I said, "our ways part
from this moment. I fancy that that is neither unexpected nor unwelcome news to you.
The review in this journal is not the real reason for my decision; it has merely finally
confirmed it. The real reason is this: originally I thought my intervention might be of
some use to you, while now I cannot but recognize that I have damaged you in every
direction. Why it has turned out so I cannot say; the causes of success and unsuccess
are always ambiguous; but don't look for the sole explanation in my shortcomings.
Consider: you too had the best intentions, and yet, if one regards the matter
objectively, you failed. I don't intend it as a joke, for it would be a joke against myself,
when I say that your connection with me must unfortunately be counted among your
failures. It is neither cowardice nor treachery, if I withdraw from the affair now.
Actually it involves a certain degree of self-renunciation; my pamphlet itself proves
how much I respect you personally, in a certain sense you have become my teacher,
and I have almost grown fond of the mole itself. Nevertheless I have decided to step
aside; you are the discoverer, and all that I can do is to prevent you from gaining
possible fame, while I attract failure and pass it on to you. At least that is your own
$ 200
opinion. Enough of that. The sole expiation that I can make is to beg your forgiveness
and, should you require it, to publish openly, that is, in this journal, the admission I
have just made to you."
 These were my words; they were not entirely sincere, but what was sincere in
them was obvious enough. My explanation had the effect upon him that I had roughly
anticipated. Most old people have something deceitful, something mendacious, in
their dealings with people younger than themselves; you live at peace with them,
imagine you are on the best of terms with them, know their ruling prejudices, receive
continual assurances of amity, take the whole thing for granted; and when something
decisive happens and those peaceful relations, so long nourished, should come into
effective operation, suddenly these old people rise before you like strangers, show that
they have deeper and stronger convictions, and now for the first time literally unfurl
their banner, and with terror you read upon it the new decree. The reason for this
terror lies chiefly in the fact that what the old say now is really far more just and
sensible than what they had said before; it is as if even the self-evident had degrees of
validity, and their words now were more self-evident than ever. But the final deceit
that lies in their words consists in this, that at bottom they have always said what they
are saying now. I must have probed deeply into the schoolmaster, seeing that his next
words did not entirely take me by surprise. "Child," he said, laying his hand on mine
and patting it gently, "how did you ever take it into your head to go into this affair?
The very first I heard of it I talked it over with my wife." He pushed his chair back
from the table, got up, spread out his arms, and stared at the floor, as if his tiny little
wife were standing there and he were speaking to her. " 'We've struggled on alone,' I
said to her, 'for many years; now, it seems, a noble protector has risen for us in the city,
a fine businessman, Mr. So-and-so. We should congratulate ourselves, shouldn't we? A
businessman in the city isn't to be sniffed at; when an ignorant peasant believes us and
says so it doesn't help us, for what a peasant may say or do is of no account; whether
he says the old village schoolmaster is right, or spits to show his contempt, the net
result is the same. And if instead of one peasant ten thousand should stand up for us,
$ 201
the result, if possible, would only be still worse. A businessman in the city, on the
other hand, that's something else again; a man like that has connections, things he says
in passing, as it were, are taken up and repeated, new patrons interest themselves in
the question, one of them, it may be, remarks: You can learn even from old village
schoolmasters, and next day whole crowds of people are saying it to one another,
people you would never imagine saying such things, to look at them. Next, money is
found to finance the business, one gentleman goes around collecting for it and the
others shower subscriptions on him; they decide that the village schoolmaster must be
dragged from his obscurity; they arrive, they don't bother about his external
appearance, but take him to their bosoms, and since his wife and children hang onto
him, they are taken along too. Have you ever watched city people? They chatter
without stopping. When there's a whole lot of them together you can hear their
chatter running from right to left and back again, and up and down, this way and that.
And so, chattering away, they push us into the coach, so that we've hardly time to bow
to everybody. The gentleman on the coachman's seat puts his glasses straight,
flourishes his whip, and off we go. They all wave a parting greeting to the village, as if
we were still there and not sitting among them. The more impatient city people drive
out in carriages to meet us. As we approach they get up from their seats and crane
their necks. The gentleman who collected the money arranges everything
methodically and in order. When we drive into the city we are a long procession of
carriages. We think the public welcome is over; but it really only begins when we reach
our hotel. In a city an announcement attracts a great many people. What interests one
interests all the rest immediately. They take their views from one another and
promptly make those views their own. All the people who haven't managed to drive
out and meet us in carriages are waiting in front of the hotel; others could have driven
out, but they were too self-conscious. They're waiting too. It's extraordinary, the way
that the gentleman who collected the money keeps his eye on everything and directs
everything.' "
 I had listened coolly to him, indeed I had grown cooler and cooler while he
$ 202
went on. On the table I had piled up all the copies of my pamphlet in my possession.
Only a few were missing, for during the past week I had sent out a circular demanding
the return of all the copies distributed, and had received most of them back. True,
from several quarters I had got very polite notes saying that So-and-so could not
remember having received such a pamphlet, and that, if it had actually arrived, he was
sorry to confess that he must have lost it. Even that was gratifying; in my heart I
desired nothing better. Only one reader begged me to let him keep the pamphlet as a
curiosity, pledging himself, in accordance with the spirit of my circular, to show it to
no one for twenty years. The village teacher had not yet seen my circular. I was glad
that his words made it so easy for me to show it to him. I could do that without anxiety
in any case, however, as I had drawn it up very circumspectly, keeping his interests in
mind the whole time. The crucial passage in the circular ran as follows: "I do not ask
for the return of the pamphlet because I retract in any way the opinions defended
there or wish them to be regarded as erroneous or even undemonstrable on any point.
My request has purely personal and moreover very urgent grounds; but no conclusion
whatever must be drawn from it as regards my attitude to the whole matter. I beg THE
VILLAGE SCHOOLMASTER to draw your particular attention to this, and would be glad
also if you would make the fact better known."
 For the time being I kept my hand over the circular and said: "You reproach me
in your heart because things have not turned out as you hoped. Why do that? Don't let
us embitter our last moments together. And do try to see that, though you've made a
discovery, it isn't necessarily greater than every other discovery, and consequently the
injustice you suffer under any greater than other injustices. I don't know the ways of
learned societies, but I can't believe that in the most favorable circumstances you
would have been given a reception even remotely resembling the one you seem to have
described to your wife. While I myself still hoped that something might come of my
pamphlet, the most I expected was that perhaps the attention of a professor might be
drawn to our case, that he might commission some young student to inquire into it,
that this student might visit you and check in his own fashion your and my inquiries
$ 203
once more on the spot, and that finally, if the results seemed to him worth
consideration -- we must not forget that all young students are full of skepticism -- he
might bring out a pamphlet of his own in which your discoveries would be put on a
scientific basis. All the same, even if that hope had been realized nothing very much
would have been achieved. The student's pamphlet, supporting such queer opinions,
would probably be held up to ridicule. If you take this agricultural journal as a sample,
you can see how easily that may happen; and scientific periodicals are still more
ruthless in such matters. And that's quite understandable; professors bear a great
responsibility toward themselves, toward science, toward posterity; they can't take
every new discovery to their bosoms straight away. We others have the advantage of
them there. But I'll leave that out of account and assume that the student's pamphlet
has found acceptance. What would happen next? You would probably receive
honorable mention, and that might perhaps benefit your profession too; people would
say: 'Our village schoolmasters have sharp eyes'; and this journal, if journals have a
memory or a conscience, would be forced to make you a public apology; also some
well-intentioned professor would be found to secure a scholarship for you; it's possible
they might even get you to come to the city, find a post for you in some school, and so
give you a chance of using the scientific resources of a city so as to improve yourself.
But if I am to be quite frank, I think they would content themselves with merely trying
to do all this. They would summon you and you would appear, but only as an ordinary
petitioner like hundreds of others, and not in solemn state; they would talk to you and
praise your honest efforts, but they would see at the same time that you were an old
man, that it was hopeless for anyone to begin to study science at such an age, and
moreover that you had hit upon your discovery more by chance than by design, and
had besides no ambition to extend your labors beyond this one case. For these reasons
they would probably send you back to your village again. Your discovery, of course,
would be carried further, for it is not so trifling that, once having achieved recognition,
it could be forgotten again. But you would not hear much more about it, and what you
heard you would scarcely understand. Every new discovery is assumed at once into the
sum total of knowledge, and with that ceases in a sense to be a discovery; it dissolves
$ 204
into the whole and disappears, and one must have a trained scientific eye even to
recognize it after that. For it is related to fundamental axioms of whose existence we
don't even know, and in the debates of science it is raised on these axioms into the
very clouds. How can we expect to understand such things? Often as we listen to some
learned discussion we may be under the impression that it is about your discovery,
when it is about something quite different, and the next time, when we think it is
about something else, and not about your discovery at all, it may turn out to be about
that and that alone.
 "Don't you see that? You would remain in your village, you would be able with
the extra money to feed and clothe your family a little better; but your discovery would
be taken out of your hands, and without your being able with any show of justice to
object; for only in the city could it be given its final seal. And people wouldn't be
altogether ungrateful to you, they might build a little museum on the spot where the
discovery was made, it would become one of the sights of the village, you would be
given the keys to keep, and, so that you shouldn't lack some outward token of honor,
they could give you a little medal to wear on the breast of your coat, like those worn by
attendants in scientific institutions. All this might have been possible; but was it what
you wanted?"
 Without stopping to consider his answer he turned on me and said: "And so
that's what you wanted to achieve for me?"
 "Probably," I said, "I didn't consider what I was doing carefully enough at the
time to be able to answer that clearly now. I wanted to help you, but that was a failure,
and the worst failure I have ever had. That's why I want to withdraw now and undo
what I've done as far as I'm able."
 "Well and good," said the teacher, taking out his pipe and beginning to fill it
with the tobacco that he carried loose in all his pockets. "You took up this thankless
business of your own free will, and now of your own free will you withdraw. So that's
$ 205
all right."
 "I'm not an obstinate man," I said. "Do you find anything to object to in my
proposal?"
 "No, absolutely nothing," said the schoolmaster, and his pipe was already going.
I could not bear the stink of his tobacco, and so I rose and began to walk up and down
the room. From previous encounters I was used to the teacher's extreme taciturnity,
and to the fact that in spite of it he never seemed to have any desire to stir from my
room once he was in it. That had often disturbed me before. He wants something
more, I always thought at such times, and I would offer him money, which indeed he
invariably accepted. Yet he never went away before it suited his convenience.
Generally his pipe was smoked out by that time, then he would ceremoniously and
respectfully push his chair in to the table, make a detour around it, seize his cane
standing in the corner, press my hand warmly, and go. But today his silent presence as
he sat there was an actual torture to me. When one has bidden a last farewell to
someone, as I had done, a farewell accepted in good faith, surely the mutual formalities
that remain should be got over as quickly as possible and one should not burden one's
host purposelessly with one's silent presence. As I contemplated the stubborn fellow
from behind, while he sat at the table, it seemed an impossible idea to ever show him
the door.

Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 206
Blumfeld, an Elderly Bachelor
 ONE EVENING Blumfeld, an elderly bachelor, was climbing up to his apartment -
- a laborious undertaking, for he lived on the sixth floor. While climbing up he
thought, as he had so often recently, how unpleasant this utterly lonely life was: to
reach his empty rooms he had to climb these six floors almost in secret, there put on
his dressing gown, again almost in secret, light his pipe, read a little of the French
magazine to which he had been subscribing for years, at the same time sip at a
homemade kirsch, and finally, after half an hour, go to bed, but not before having
completely rearranged his bedclothes which the unteachable charwoman would insist
on arranging in her own way. Some companion, someone to witness these activities,
would have been very welcome to Blumfeld. He had already been wondering whether
he shouldn't acquire a little dog. These animals are gay and above all grateful and loyal;
one of Blumfeld's colleagues has a dog of this kind; it follows no one but its master and
when it hasn't seen him for a few moments it greets him at once with loud barkings, by
which it is evidently trying to express its joy at once more finding that extraordinary
benefactor, its master. True, a dog also has its drawbacks. However well kept it may
be, it is bound to dirty the room. This just cannot be avoided; one cannot give it a hot
bath each time before letting it into the room; besides, its health couldn't stand that.
Blumfeld, on the other hand, can't stand dirt in his room. To him cleanliness is
essential, and several times a week he is obliged to have words with his charwoman,
who is unfortunately not very painstaking in this respect. Since she is hard of hearing
he usually drags her by the arm to those spots in the room which he finds lacking in
cleanliness. By this strict discipline he has achieved in his room a neatness more or less
commensurate with his wishes. By acquiring a dog, however, he would be almost
$ 207
deliberately introducing into his room the dirt which hitherto he had been so careful
to avoid. Fleas, the dog's constant companions, would appear. And once fleas were
there, it would not be long before Blumfeld would be abandoning his comfortable
room to the dog and looking for another one. Uncleanliness, however, is but one of the
drawbacks of dogs. Dogs also fall ill and no one really understands dogs' diseases. Then
the animal sits in a corner or limps about, whimpers, coughs, chokes from some pain;
one wraps it in a rug, whistles a little melody, offers it milk -- in short, one nurses it in
the hope that this, as indeed is possible, is a passing sickness while it may be a serious,
disgusting, and contagious disease. And even if the dog remains healthy, one day it will
grow old, one won't have the heart to get rid of the faithful animal in time, and then
comes the moment when one's own age peers out at one from the dog's oozing eyes.
Then one has to cope with the half-blind, weak-lunged animal all but immobile with
fat, and in this way pay dearly for the pleasures the dog once had given. Much as
Blumfeld would like to have a dog at this moment, he would rather go on climbing the
stairs alone for another thirty years than be burdened later on by such an old dog
which, sighing louder than he, would drag itself up, step by step.
 So Blumfeld will remain alone, after all; he really feels none of the old maid's
longing to have around her some submissive living creature that she can protect,
lavish her affection upon, and continue to serve -- for which purpose a cat, a canary,
even a goldfish would suffice -- or, if this cannot be, rest content with flowers on the
window sill. Blumfeld only wants a companion, an animal to which he doesn't have to
pay much attention, which doesn't mind an occasional kick, which even, in an
emergency, can spend the night in the street, but which nevertheless, when Blumfeld
feels like it, is promptly at his disposal with its barking, jumping, and licking of hands.
This is what Blumfeld wants, but since, as he realizes, it cannot be had without serious
drawbacks, he renounces it, and yet -- in accordance with his thoroughgoing
disposition -- the idea from time to time, this evening, for instance, occurs to him
again.
$ 208
 While taking the key from his pocket outside his room, he is startled by a
sound coming from within. A peculiar rattling sound, very lively but very regular.
Since Blumfeld has just been thinking of dogs, it reminds him of the sounds produced
by paws pattering one after the other over a floor. But paws don't rattle, so it can't be
paws. He quickly unlocks the door and switches on the light. He is not prepared for
what he sees. For this is magic -- two small white celluloid balls with blue stripes
jumping up and down side by side on the parquet; when one of them touches the floor
the other is in the air, a game they continue ceaselessly to play. At school one day
Blumfeld had seen some little pellets jumping about like this during a well-known
electrical experiment, but these are comparatively large balls jumping freely about in
the room and no electrical experiment is being made. Blumfeld bends down to get a
good look at them. They are undoubtedly ordinary balls, they probably contain several
smaller balls, and it is these that produce the rattling sound. Blumfeld gropes in the air
to find out whether they are hanging from some threads -- no, they are moving
entirely on their own. A pity Blumfeld isn't a small child, two balls like these would
have been a happy surprise for him, whereas now the whole thing gives him rather an
unpleasant feeling. It's not quite pointless after all to live in secret as an unnoticed
bachelor, now someone, no matter who, has penetrated this secret and sent him these
two strange balls.
 He tries to catch one but they retreat before him, thus luring him on to follow
them through the room. It's really too silly, he thinks, running after balls like this; he
stands still and realizes that the moment he abandons the pursuit, they too remain on
the same spot. I will try to catch them all the same, he thinks again, and hurries toward
them. They immediately run away, but Blumfeld, his legs apart, forces them into a
corner of the room, and there, in front of a trunk, he manages to catch one ball. It's a
small cool ball, and it turns in his hand, clearly anxious to slip away. And the other
ball, too, as though aware of its comrade's distress, jumps higher than before,
extending the leaps until it touches Blumfeld's hand. It beats against his hand, beats in
ever faster leaps, alters its angle of attack, then, powerless against the hand which
$ 209
encloses the ball so completely, springs even higher and is probably trying to reach
Blumfeld's face. Blumfeld could catch this ball too, and lock them both up somewhere,
but at the moment it strikes him as too humiliating to take such measures against two
little balls. Besides, it's fun owning these balls, and soon enough they'll grow tired, roll
under the cupboard, and be quiet. Despite this deliberation, however, Blumfeld, near
to anger, flings the ball to the ground, and it is a miracle that in doing so the delicate,
all but transparent celluloid cover doesn't break. Without hesitation the two balls
resume their former low, well-coordinated jumps.
 Blumfeld undresses calmly, arranges his clothes in the wardrobe which he
always inspects carefully to make sure the charwoman has left everything in order.
Once or twice he glances over his shoulder at the balls, which, unpursued, seem to be
pursuing him; they have followed him and are now jumping close behind him.
Blumfeld puts on his dressing gown and sets out for the opposite wall to fetch one of
the pipes which are hanging in a rack. Before turning around he instinctively kicks his
foot out backwards, but the balls know how to get out of its way and remain
untouched. As Blumfeld goes off to fetch the pipe the balls at once follow close behind
him; he shuffles along in his slippers, taking irregular steps, yet each step is followed
almost without pause by the sound of the balls; they are keeping pace with him. To see
how the balls manage to do this, Blumfeld turns suddenly around. But hardly has he
turned when the balls describe a semicircle and are already behind him again, and this
they repeat every time he turns. Like submissive companions, they try to avoid
appearing in front of Blumfeld. Up to the present they have evidently dared to do so
only in order to introduce themselves; now, however, it seems they have actually
entered into his service.
 Hitherto, when faced with situations he couldn't master, Blumfeld had always
chosen to behave as though he hadn't noticed anything. It had often helped and
usually improved the situation. This, then, is what he does now; he takes up a position
in front of the pipe rack and, puffing out his lips, chooses a pipe, fills it with particular
$ 210
care from the tobacco pouch close at hand, and allows the balls to continue their
jumping behind him. But he hesitates to approach the table, for to hear the sound of
the jumps coinciding with that of his own steps almost hurts him. So there he stands,
and while taking an unnecessarily long time to fill his pipe he measures the distance
separating him from the table. At last, however, he overcomes his faintheartedness
and covers the distance with such stamping of feet that he cannot hear the balls. But
the moment he is seated he can hear them jumping up and down behind his chair as
distinctly as ever.
 Above the table, within reach, a shelf is nailed to the wall on which stands the
bottle of kirsch surrounded by little glasses. Beside it, in a pile, lie several copies of the
French magazine. (This very day the latest issue has arrived and Blumfeld takes it
down. He quite forgets the kirsch; he even has the feeling that today he is proceeding
with his usual activities only to console himself, for he feels no genuine desire to read.
Contrary to his usual habit of carefully turning one $ after the other, he opens the
magazine at random and there finds a large photograph. He forces himself to examine
it in detail. It shows a meeting between the Czar of Russia and the President of France.
This takes place on a ship. All about as far as can be seen are many other ships, the
smoke from their funnels vanishing in the bright sky. Both Czar and President have
rushed toward each other with long strides and are clasping one another by the hand.
Behind the Czar as well as behind the President stand two men. By comparison with
the gay faces of the Czar and the President, the faces of their attendants are very
solemn, the eyes of each group focused on their master. Lower down -- the scene
evidently takes place on the top deck -- stand long lines of saluting sailors cut off by
the margin. Gradually Blumfeld contemplates the picture with more interest, then
holds it a little further away and looks at it with blinking eyes. He has always had a
taste for such imposing scenes. The way the chief personages clasp each other's hand
so naturally, so cordially and lightheartedly, this he finds most lifelike. And it's just as
appropriate that the attendants -- high-ranking gentlemen, of course, with their names
printed beneath -- express in their bearing the solemnity of the historical moment.)
$ 211
 And instead of helping himself to everything he needs, Blumfeld sits there
tense, staring at the bowl of his still unlit pipe. He is lying in wait. Suddenly, quite
unexpectedly, his numbness leaves him and with a jerk he turns around in his chair.
But the balls, equally alert, or perhaps automatically following the law governing them,
also change their position the moment Blumfeld turns, and hide behind his back.
Blumfeld now sits with his back to the table, the cold pipe in his hand. And now the
balls jump under the table and, since there's a rug there, they are less audible. This is a
great advantage: only faint, hollow noises can be heard, one has to pay great attention
to catch their sound. Blumfeld, however, does pay great attention, and hears them
distinctly. But this is so only for the moment, in a little while he probably won't hear
them any more. The fact that they cannot make themselves more audible on the rug
strikes Blumfeld as a great weakness on the part of the balls. What one has to do is lay
one or even better two rugs under them and they are all but powerless. Admittedly
only for a limited time, and besides, their very existence wields a certain power.
 Right now Blumfeld could have made good use of a dog, a wild young animal
would soon have dealt with these balls; he imagines this dog trying to catch them with
its paws, chasing them from their positions, hunting them all over the room, and
finally getting hold of them between its teeth. It's quite possible that before long
Blumfeld will acquire a dog.
 For the moment, however, the balls have no one to fear but Blumfeld, and he
has no desire to destroy them just now, perhaps he lacks the necessary determination.
He comes home in the evening tired from work and just when he is in need of some
rest he is faced with this surprise. Only now does he realize how tired he really is. No
doubt he will destroy the balls, and that in the near future, but not just yet, probably
not until tomorrow. If one looks at the whole thing with an unprejudiced eye, the balls
behave modestly enough. From time to time, for instance, they could jump into the
foreground, show themselves, and then return again to their positions, or they could
jump higher so as to beat against the tabletop in order to compensate themselves for
$ 212
the muffling effect of the rug. But this they don't do, they don't want to irritate
Blumfeld unduly, they are evidently confining themselves to what is absolutely
necessary.
 Even this measured necessity, however, is quite sufficient to spoil Blumfeld's
rest at the table. He has been sitting there only a few minutes and is already
considering going to bed. One of his motives for this is that he can't smoke here, for he
has left the matches on his bedside table. Thus he would have to fetch these matches,
but once having reached the bedside table he might as well stay there and lie down.
For this he has an ulterior motive: he thinks that the balls, with their mania for
keeping behind him, will jump onto the bed, and that there, in lying down, on purpose
or not, he will squash them. The objection that what would then remain of the balls
could still go on jumping, he dismisses. Even the unusual must have its limits.
Complete balls jump anyway, even if not incessantly, but fragments of balls never
jump, and consequently will not jump in this case, either. "Up!" he shouts, having
grown almost reckless from this reflection and, the balls still behind him, he stamps off
to bed. His hope seems to be confirmed, for when he purposely takes up a position
quite near the bed, one ball promptly springs onto it. Then, however, the unexpected
occurs: the other ball disappears under the bed. The possibility that the balls could
jump under the bed as well had not occurred to Blumfeld. He is outraged about the
one ball, although he is aware how unjust this is, for by jumping under the bed the ball
fulfills its duty perhaps better than the ball on the bed. Now everything depends on
which place the balls decide to choose, for Blumfeld does not believe that they can
work separately for any length of time. And sure enough a moment later the ball on
the floor also jumps onto the bed. Now I've got them, thinks Blumfeld, hot with joy,
and tears his dressing gown from his body to throw himself into bed. At that moment,
however, the very same ball jumps back under the bed. Overwhelmed with
disappointment, Blumfeld almost collapses. Very likely the ball just took a good look
around up there and decided it didn't like it. And now the other one has followed, too,
and of course remains, for it's better down there. "Now I'll have these drummers with
$ 213
me all night," thinks Blumfeld, biting his lips and nodding his head.
 He feels gloomy, without actually knowing what harm the balls could do him in
the night. He is a good sleeper, he will easily be able to ignore so slight a noise. To
make quite sure of this and mindful of his past experience, he lays two rugs on the
floor. It's as if he owned a little dog for which he wants to make a soft bed. And as
though the balls had also grown tired and sleepy, their jumping has become lower and
slower than before. As Blumfeld kneels beside the bed, lamp in hand, he thinks for a
moment that the balls might come to rest on the rug -- they fall so weakly, roll so
slowly along. Then, however, they dutifully rise again. Yet it is quite possible that in
the morning when Blumfeld looks under the bed he'll find there two quiet, harmless
children's balls.
 But it seems that they may not even be able to keep up their jumping until the
morning, for as soon as Blumfeld is in bed he doesn't hear them anymore. He strains
his ears, leans out of bed to listen -- not a sound. The effect of the rugs can't be as
strong as that; the only explanation is that the balls are no longer jumping, either
because they aren't able to bounce themselves off the rug and have therefore
abandoned jumping for the time being or, which is more likely, they will never jump
again. Blumfeld could get up and see exactly what's going on, but in his relief at finding
peace at last he prefers to remain where he is. He would rather not risk disturbing the
pacified balls even with his eyes. Even smoking he happily renounces, turns over on his
side, and promptly goes to sleep.
 But he does not remain undisturbed; as usual he sleeps without dreaming, but
very restlessly. Innumerable times during the night he is startled by the delusion that
someone is knocking at his door. He knows quite well that no one is knocking; who
would knock at night and at his lonely bachelor's door? Yet although he knows this for
certain, he is startled again and again and each time glances in suspense at the door,
his mouth open, eyes wide, a strand of hair trembling over his damp forehead. He tries
$ 214
to count how many times he has been woken but, dizzy from the huge numbers he
arrives at, he falls back to sleep again. He thinks he knows where the knocking comes
from; not from the door, but somewhere quite different; being heavy with sleep,
however, he cannot quite remember on what his suspicions are based. All he knows is
that innumerable tiny unpleasant sounds accumulate before producing the great
strong knocking. He would happily suffer all the unpleasantness of the small sounds if
he could be spared the actual knocking, but for some reason it's too late; he cannot
interfere, the moment has passed, he can't even speak, his mouth opens but all that
comes out is a silent yawn, and furious at this he thrusts his face into the pillows. Thus
the night passes.
 In the morning he is awakened by the charwoman's knocking; with a sigh of
relief he welcomes the gentle tap on the door whose inaudibility has in the past always
been one of his sources of complaint. He is about to shout "Come in!" when he hears
another lively, faint, yet all but belligerent knocking. It's the balls under the bed. Have
they woken up? Have they, unlike him, gathered new strength overnight? "Just a
moment," shouts Blumfeld to the charwoman, jumps out of bed, and, taking great care
to keep the balls behind him, throws himself on the floor, his back still toward them;
then, twisting his head over his shoulder, he glances at the balls and nearly lets out a
curse. Like children pushing away blankets that annoy them at night, the balls have
apparently spent all night pushing the rugs, with tiny twitching movements, so far
away from under the bed that they are now once more on the parquet, where they can
continue making their noise. "Back onto the rugs!" says Blumfeld with an angry face,
and only when the balls, thanks to the rugs, have become quiet again, does he call in
the charwoman. While she -- a fat, dull-witted, stiff-backed woman -- is laying the
breakfast on the table and doing the few necessary chores, Blumfeld stands motionless
in his dressing gown by his bed so as to keep the balls in their place. With his eyes he
follows the charwoman to see whether she notices anything. This, since she is hard of
hearing, is very unlikely, and the fact that Blumfeld thinks he sees the charwoman
stopping here and there, holding on to some furniture and listening with raised
$ 215
eyebrows, he puts down to his overwrought condition caused by a bad night's sleep. It
would relieve him if he could persuade the charwoman to speed up her work, but if
anything she is slower than usual. She loads herself laboriously with Blumfeld's clothes
and shuffles out with them into the corridor, stays away a long time, and the din she
makes beating the clothes echoes in his ears with slow, monotonous thuds. And
during all this time Blumfeld has to remain on the bed, cannot move for fear of
drawing the balls behind him, has to let the coffee -- which he likes to drink as hot as
possible -- get cold, and can do nothing but stare at the drawn blinds behind which the
day is dimly dawning. At last the charwoman has finished, bids him good morning,
and is about to leave; but before she actually goes she hesitates by the door, moves her
lips a little, and takes a long look at Blumfeld. Blumfeld is about to remonstrate when
she at last departs. Blumfeld longs to fling the door open and shout after her that she is
a stupid, idiotic old woman. However, when he reflects on what he actually has against
her, he can only think of the paradox of her having clearly noticed nothing and yet
trying to give the impression that she has. How confused his thoughts have become!
And all on account of a bad night. Some explanation for his poor sleep he finds in the
fact that last night he deviated from his usual habits by not smoking or drinking any
schnapps. When for once I don't smoke or drink schnapps -- and this is the result of
his reflections -- I sleep badly.
 From now on he is going to take better care of his health, and he begins by
fetching some cotton wool from his medicine chest which hangs over his bedside table
and putting two little wads of it into his ears. Then he stands up and takes a trial step.
Although the balls do follow he can hardly hear them; the addition of another wad
makes them quite inaudible. Blumfeld takes a few more steps; nothing particularly
unpleasant happens. Everyone for himself, Blumfeld as well as the balls, and although
they are bound to one another they don't disturb each other. Only once, when
Blumfeld turns around rather suddenly and one ball fails to make the
countermovement fast enough, does he touch it with his knee. But this is the only
incident. Otherwise Blumfeld calmly drinks his coffee; he is as hungry as though,
$ 216
instead of sleeping last night, he had gone for a long walk; he washes in cold,
exceedingly refreshing water, and puts on his clothes. He still hasn't pulled up the
blinds; rather, as a precaution, he has preferred to remain in semidarkness; he has no
wish for the balls to be seen by other eyes. But now that he is ready to go he has
somehow to provide for the balls in case they should dare -- not that he thinks they
will -- to follow him into the street. He thinks of a good solution, opens the large
wardrobe, and places himself with his back to it. As though divining his intention, the
balls steer clear of the wardrobe's interior, taking advantage of every inch of space
between Blumfeld and the wardrobe; when there's no other alternative they jump into
the wardrobe for a moment, but when faced by the dark out they promptly jump
again. Rather than be lured over the edge further into the wardrobe, they neglect their
duty and stay by Blumfeld's side. But their little ruses avail them nothing, for now
Blumfeld himself climbs backward into the wardrobe and they have to follow him.
And with this their fate has been sealed, for on the floor of the wardrobe lie various
smallish objects such as boots, boxes, small trunks which, although carefully arranged
-- Blumfeld now regrets this -- nevertheless considerably hamper the balls. And when
Blumfeld, having by now pulled the door almost to, jumps out of it with an enormous
leap such as he has not made for years, slams the door, and turns the key, the balls are
imprisoned. "Well, that worked," thinks Blumfeld, wiping the sweat from his face.
What a din the balls are making in the wardrobe! It sounds as though they are
desperate. Blumfeld, on the other hand, is very contented. He leaves the room and
already the deserted corridor has a soothing effect on him. He takes the wool out of his
ears and is enchanted by the countless sounds of the waking house. Few people are to
be seen, it's still very early.
 Downstairs in the hall in front of the low door leading to the charwoman's
basement apartment stands that woman's ten-year-old son. The image of his mother,
not one feature of the woman has been omitted in this child's face. Bandy-legged,
hands in his trouser pockets, he stands there wheezing, for he already has a goiter and
can breathe only with difficulty. But whereas Blumfeld, whenever the boy crosses his
$ 217
path, usually quickens his step to spare himself the spectacle, today he almost feels like
pausing for a moment. Even if the boy has been brought into the world by this woman
and shows every sign of his origin, he is nevertheless a child, the thoughts of a child
still dwell in this shapeless head, and if one were to speak to him sensibly and ask him
something, he would very likely answer in a bright voice, innocent and reverential, and
after some inner struggle one could bring oneself to pat these cheeks. Although this is
what Blumfeld thinks, he nevertheless passes him by. In the street he realizes that the
weather is pleasanter than he had suspected from his room. The morning mist has
dispersed and patches of blue sky have appeared, brushed by a strong wind. Blumfeld
has the balls to thank for his having left his room much earlier than usual; even the
paper he has left unread on the table; in any case he has saved a great deal of time and
can now afford to walk slowly. It is remarkable how little he worries about the balls
now that he is separated from them. So long as they were following him they could
have been considered as something belonging to him, something which, in passing
judgment on his person, had somehow to be taken into consideration. Now, however,
they were mere toys in his wardrobe at home. And it occurs to Blumfeld that the best
way of rendering the balls harmless would be to put them to their original use. There
in the hall stands the boy; Blumfeld will give him the balls, not lend them, but actually
present them to him, which is surely tantamount to ordering their destruction. And
even if they were to remain intact they would mean even less in the boy's hands than
in the wardrobe, the whole house would watch the boy playing with them, other
children would join in, and the general opinion that the balls are things to play with
and in no way life companions of Blumfeld would be firmly and irrefutably established.
Blumfeld runs back into the house. The boy has just gone down the basement stairs
and is about to open the door. So Blumfeld has to call the boy and pronounce his
name, a name that to him seems as ludicrous as everything else connected with the
child. "Alfred! Alfred!" he shouts. The boy hesitates for a long time. "Come here!"
shouts Blumfeld, "I've got something for you." The janitor's two little girls appear from
the door opposite and, full of curiosity, take up positions on either side of Blumfeld.
They grasp the situation much more quickly than the boy and cannot understand why
$ 218
he doesn't come at once. Without taking their eyes off Blumfeld they beckon to the
boy, but cannot fathom what kind of present is awaiting Alfred. Tortured with
curiosity, they hop from one foot to the other. Blumfeld laughs at them as well as at
the boy. The latter seems to have figured it all out and climbs stiffly, clumsily up the
steps. Not even in his gait can he manage to belie his mother, who, incidentally, has
appeared in the basement doorway. To make sure that the charwoman also
understands and in the hope that she will supervise the carrying out of his
instructions, should it be necessary, Blumfeld shouts excessively loud. "Up in my
room," says Blumfeld, "I have two lovely balls. Would you like to have them?" Not
knowing how to behave, the boy simply screws up his mouth, turns around, and looks
inquiringly down at his mother. The girls, however, promptly begin to jump around
Blumfeld and ask him for the balls. "You will be allowed to play with them too,"
Blumfeld tells them, but waits for the boy's answer. He could of course give the balls to
the girls, but they strike him as too unreliable and for the moment he has more
confidence in the boy. Meanwhile, the latter, without having exchanged a word, has
taken counsel with his mother and nods his assent to Blumfeld's repeated question.
"Then listen," says Blumfeld, who is quite prepared to receive no thanks for his gift.
"Your mother has the key of my door, you must borrow it from her. But here is the key
of my wardrobe, and in the wardrobe you will find the balls. Take good care to lock the
wardrobe and the room again. But with the balls you can do what you like and you
don't have to bring them back. Have you understood me?"
 Unfortunately, the boy has not understood. Blumfeld has tried to make
everything particularly clear to this hopelessly dense creature, but for this very reason
has repeated everything too often, has in turn too often mentioned keys, room, and
wardrobe, and as a result the boy stares at him as though he were rather a seducer
than his benefactor. The girls, on the other hand, have understood everything
immediately, press against Blumfeld, and stretch out their hands for the key. "Wait a
moment," says Blumfeld, by now annoyed with them all. Time, moreover, is passing,
he can't stand about much longer. If only the mother would say that she has
$ 219
understood him and take matters in hand for the boy! Instead of which she still stands
down by the door, smiles with the affectation of the bashful deaf, and is probably
under the impression that Blumfeld up there has suddenly fallen for the boy and is
hearing him his lessons. Blumfeld on the other hand can't very well climb down the
basement stairs and shout into the charwoman's ear to make her son for God's sake
relieve him of the balls! It had required enough of his self-control as it was to entrust
the key of his wardrobe for a whole day to this family. It is certainly not in order to
save himself trouble that he is handing the key to the boy rather than himself leading
the boy up and there giving him the balls. But he can't very well first give the balls
away and then immediately deprive the boy of them by -- as would be bound to
happen -- drawing them after him as his followers. "So you still don't understand me?"
asks Blumfeld almost wistfully after having started a fresh explanation which, however,
he immediately interrupts at sight of the boy's vacant stare. So vacant a stare renders
one helpless. It could tempt one into saying more than one intends, if only to fill the
vacancy with sense. Whereupon "We'll fetch the balls for him!" shout the girls. They
are shrewd and have realized that they can obtain the balls only through using the boy
as an intermediary, but that they themselves have to bring about this mediation. From
the janitor's room a clock strikes, warning Blumfeld to hurry. "Well, then, take the
key," says Blumfeld, and the key is more snatched from his hand than given by him. He
would have handed it to the boy with infinitely more confidence. "The key to the room
you'll have to get from the woman," Blumfeld adds. "And when you return with the
balls you must hand both keys to her." "Yes, yes!" shout the girls and run down the
steps. They know everything, absolutely everything; and as though Blumfeld were
infected by the boy's denseness, he is unable to understand how they could have
grasped everything so quickly from his explanations.
 Now they are already tugging at the charwoman's skirt but, tempting as it
would be, Blumfeld cannot afford to watch them carrying out their task, not only
because it's already late, but also because he has no desire to be present at the
liberation of the balls. He would in fact far prefer to be several streets away when the
$ 220
girls first open the door of his room. After all, how does he know what else he might
have to expect from these balls! And so for the second time this morning he leaves the
house. He has one last glimpse of the charwoman defending herself against the girls,
and of the boy stirring his bandy legs to come to his mother's assistance. It's beyond
Blumfeld's comprehension why a creature like this servant should prosper and
propagate in this world.
 While on his way to the linen factory, where Blumfeld is employed, thoughts
about his work gradually get the upper hand. He quickens his step and, despite the
delay caused by the boy, he is the first to arrive in his office. This office is a glassenclosed room containing a writing desk for Blumfeld and two standing desks for the
two assistants subordinate to him. Although these standing desks are so small and
narrow as to suggest they are meant for schoolchildren, this office is very crowded and
the assistants cannot sit down, for then there would be no place for Blumfeld's chair.
As a result they stand all day, pressed against their desks. For them of course this is
very uncomfortable, but it also makes it very difficult for Blumfeld to keep an eye on
them. They often press eagerly against their desks not so much in order to work as to
whisper to one another or even to take forty winks. They give Blumfeld a great deal of
trouble; they don't help him sufficiently with the enormous amount of work that is
imposed on him. This work involves supervising the whole distribution of fabrics and
cash among the women homeworkers who are employed by the factory for the
manufacture of certain fancy commodities. To appreciate the magnitude of this task
an intimate knowledge of the general conditions is necessary. But since Blumfeld's
immediate superior has died some years ago, no one any longer possesses this
knowledge, which is also why Blumfeld cannot grant anyone the right to pronounce an
opinion on his work. The manufacturer, Herr Ottomar, for instance, clearly
underestimates Blumfeld's work; no doubt he recognizes that in the course of twenty
years Blumfeld has deserved well of the factory, and this he acknowledges not only
because he is obliged to, but also because he respects Blumfeld as a loyal, trustworthy
person. -- He underestimates his work, nevertheless, for he believes it could be
$ 221
conducted by methods more simple and therefore in every respect more profitable
than those employed by Blumfeld. It is said, and it is probably not incorrect, that
Ottomar shows himself so rarely in Blumfeld's department simply to spare himself the
annoyance that the sight of Blumfeld's working methods causes him. To be so
unappreciated is undoubtedly sad for Blumfeld, but there is no remedy, for he cannot
very well compel Ottomar to spend let us say a whole month on end in Blumfeld's
department in order to study the great variety of work being accomplished there, to
apply his own allegedly better methods, and to let himself be convinced of Blumfeld's
soundness by the collapse of the department -- which would be the inevitable result.
And so Blumfeld carries on his work undeterred as before, gives a little start whenever
Ottomar appears after a long absence, then with the subordinate's sense of duty makes
a feeble effort to explain to Ottomar this or that arrangement, whereupon the latter,
his eyes lowered and giving a silent nod, passes on. But what worries Blumfeld more
than this lack of appreciation is the thought that one day he will be compelled to leave
his job, the immediate consequence of which will be pandemonium, a confusion no
one will be able to straighten out because so far as he knows there isn't a single soul in
the factory capable of replacing him and of carrying on his job in a manner that could
be relied upon to prevent months of the most serious interruptions. Needless to say, if
the boss underestimates an employee the latter's colleagues try their best to surpass
him in this respect. In consequence everyone underestimates Blumfeld's work; no one
considers it necessary to spend any time training in Blumfeld's department, and when
new employees are hired not one of them is ever assigned to Blumfeld. As a result
Blumfeld's department lacks a younger generation to carry on. When Blumfeld, who
up to then had been managing the entire department with the help of only one
servant, demanded an assistant, weeks of bitter fighting ensued. Almost every day
Blumfeld appeared in Ottomar's office and explained to him calmly and in minute
detail why an assistant was needed in his department. He was needed not by any
means because Blumfeld wished to spare himself, Blumfeld had no intention of
sparing himself, he was doing more than his share of work and this he had no desire to
change, but would Herr Ottomar please consider how in the course of time the
$ 222
business had grown, how every department had been correspondingly enlarged, with
the exception of Blumfeld's department, which was invariably forgotten! And would he
consider too how the work had increased just there! When Blumfeld had entered the
firm, a time Herr Ottomar probably could not remember, they had employed some ten
seamstresses, today the number varied between fifty and sixty. Such a job requires
great energy; Blumfeld could guarantee that he was completely wearing himself out in
this work, but that he will continue to master it completely he can henceforth no
longer guarantee. True, Herr Ottomar had never flatly refused Blumfeld's requests,
this was something he could not do to an old employee, but the manner in which he
hardly listened, in which he talked to others over Blumfeld's head, made halfhearted
promises and had forgotten everything in a few days -- this behavior was insulting, to
say the least. Not actually to Blumfeld, Blumfeld is no romantic, pleasant as honor and
recognition may be, Blumfeld can do without them, in spite of everything he will stick
to his desk as long as it is at all possible, in any case he is in the right, and right, even
though on occasion it may take a long time, must prevail in the end. True, Blumfeld
has at last been given two assistants, but what assistants! One might have thought
Ottomar had realized he could express his contempt for the department even better by
granting rather than by refusing it these assistants. It was even possible that Ottomar
had kept Blumfeld waiting so long because he was looking for two assistants just like
these, and -- as may be imagined -- took a long time to find them. And now of course
Blumfeld could no longer complain; if he did, the answer could easily be foreseen: after
all, he had asked for one assistant and had been given two, that's how cleverly Ottomar
had arranged things. Needless to say, Blumfeld complained just the same, but only
because his predicament all but forced him to do so, not because he still hoped for any
redress. Nor did he complain emphatically, but only by the way, whenever the
occasion arose. Nevertheless, among his spiteful colleagues the rumor soon spread
that someone had asked Ottomar if it were really possible that Blumfeld, who after all
had been given such unusual aid, was still complaining. To which Ottomar answered
that this was correct, Blumfeld was still complaining, and rightly so. He, Ottomar, had
at last realized this and he intended gradually to assign to Blumfeld one assistant for
$ 223
each seamstress, in other words some sixty in all. In case this number should prove
insufficient, however, he would let him have even more and would not cease until the
bedlam, which had been developing for years in Blumfeld's department, was complete.
Now it cannot be denied that in this remark Ottomar's manner of speech had been
cleverly imitated, but Blumfeld had no doubts whatever that Ottomar would not
dream of speaking about him in such a way. The whole thing was a fabrication of the
loafers in the offices on the first floor. Blumfeld ignored it -- if only he could as calmly
have ignored the presence of the assistants! But there they stood, and could not be
spirited away. Pale, weak children. According to their credentials they had already
passed school age, but in reality this was difficult to believe. In fact their rightful place
was so clearly at their mother's knee that one would hardly have dared to entrust them
to a teacher. They still couldn't even move properly; standing up for any length of time
tired them inordinately, especially when they first arrived. When left to themselves
they promptly doubled up in their weakness, standing hunched and crooked in their
corner. Blumfeld tried to point out to them that if they went on giving in to their
indolence they would become cripples for life. To ask the assistants to make the
slightest move was to take a risk; once when one of them had been ordered to carry
something a short distance, he had run so eagerly that he had banged his knee against
a desk. The room had been full of seamstresses, the desks covered in merchandise, but
Blumfeld had been obliged to neglect everything and take the sobbing assistant into
the office and there bandage his wound. Yet even this zeal on the part of the assistant
was superficial; like actual children they tried once in a while to excel, but far more
often -- indeed almost always -- they tried to divert their superior's attention and to
cheat him. Once, at a time of the most intensive work, Blumfeld had rushed past them,
dripping with sweat, and had observed them secretly swapping stamps among the
bales of merchandise. He had felt like banging them on the head with his fists, it would
have been the only possible punishment for such behavior, but they were after all only
children and Blumfeld could not very well knock children down. And so he continued
to put up with them. Originally he had imagined that the assistants would help him
with the essential chores which at the moment of the distribution of goods required so
$ 224
much effort and vigilance. He had imagined himself standing in the center behind his
desk, keeping an eye on everything, and making the entries in the books while the
assistants ran to and fro, distributing everything according to his orders. He had
imagined that his supervision, which, sharp as it was, could not cope with such a
crowd, would be complemented by the assistants' attention; he had hoped that these
assistants would gradually acquire experience, cease depending entirely on his orders,
and finally learn to discriminate on their own between the seamstresses as to their
trustworthiness and requirements. Blumfeld soon realized that all these hopes had
been in vain and that he could not afford to let them even talk to the seamstresses.
From the beginning they had ignored some of the seamstresses, either from fear or
dislike; others to whom they felt partial they would sometimes run to meet at the door.
To them the assistants would bring whatever the women wanted, pressing it almost
secretly into their hands, although the seamstresses were perfectly entitled to receive
it, would collect on a bare shelf for these favorites various cuttings, worthless
remnants, but also a few still useful odds and ends, waving them blissfully at the
women behind Blumfeld's back and in return having sweets popped into their mouths.
Blumfeld of course soon put an end to this mischief and the moment the seamstresses
arrived he ordered the assistants back into their glass-enclosed cubicles. But for a long
time they considered this to be a grave injustice, they sulked, willfully broke their nibs,
and sometimes, although not daring to raise their heads, even knocked loudly against
the glass panes in order to attract the seamstresses' attention to the bad treatment that
in their opinion they were suffering at Blumfeld's hands.
 The wrong they do themselves the assistants cannot see. For instance, they
almost always arrive late at the office. Blumfeld, their superior, who from his earliest
youth has considered it natural to arrive half an hour before the office opens -- not
from ambition or an exaggerated sense of duty but simply from a certain feeling of
decency -- often has to wait more than an hour for his assistants. Chewing his
breakfast roll he stands behind his desk, looking through the accounts in the
seamstresses' little books. Soon he is immersed in his work and thinking of nothing
$ 225
else when suddenly he receives such a shock that his pen continues to tremble in his
hand for some while afterwards. One of the assistants has dashed in, looking as though
he is about to collapse; he is holding on to something with one hand while the other is
pressed against his heaving chest. All this, however, simply means that he is making
excuses for being late, excuses so absurd that Blumfeld purposely ignores them, for if
he didn't he would have to give the young man a well-deserved thrashing. As it is, he
just glances at him for a moment, points with outstretched hand at the cubicle, and
turns back to his work. Now one really might expect the assistant to appreciate his
superior's kindness and hurry to his place. No, he doesn't hurry, he dawdles about, he
walks on tiptoe, slowly placing one foot in front of the other. Is he trying to ridicule his
superior? No. Again it's just that mixture of fear and self-complacency against which
one is powerless. How else explain the fact that even today Blumfeld, who has himself
arrived unusually late in the office and now after a long wait -- he doesn't feel like
checking the books -- sees, through the clouds of dust raised by the stupid servant
with his broom, the two assistants sauntering peacefully along the street? Arm in arm,
they appear to be telling one another important things which, however, are sure to
have only the remotest and very likely irreverent connections with the office. The
nearer they approach the glass door, the slower they walk. One of them seizes the door
handle but fails to turn it; they just go on talking, listening, laughing. "Hurry out and
open the door for our gentlemen!" shouts Blumfeld at the servant, throwing up his
hands. But when the assistants come in, Blumfeld no longer feels like quarreling,
ignores their greetings, and goes to his desk. He starts doing his accounts, but now and
again glances up to see what his assistants are up to. One of them seems to be very
tired and rubs his eyes. When hanging up his overcoat he takes the opportunity to lean
against the wall. On the street he seemed lively enough, but the proximity of work tires
him. The other assistant, however, is eager to work, but only work of a certain kind.
For a long time it has been his wish to be allowed to sweep. But this is work to which
he is not entitled; sweeping is exclusively the servant's job; in itself Blumfeld would
have nothing against the assistant sweeping, let the assistant sweep, he can't make a
worse job of it than the servant, but if the assistant wants to sweep then he must come
$ 226
earlier, before the servant begins to sweep, and not spend on it time that is reserved
exclusively for office work. But since the young man is totally deaf to any sensible
argument, at least the servant -- that half-blind old buffer whom the boss would
certainly not tolerate in any department but Blumfeld's and who is still alive only by
the grace of the boss and God -- at least the servant might be sensible and hand the
broom for a moment to the young man who, being clumsy, would soon lose his
interest and run after the servant with the broom in order to persuade him to go on
sweeping. It appears, however, that the servant feels especially responsible for the
sweeping; one can see how he, the moment the young man approaches him, tries to
grasp the broom more firmly with his trembling hands; he even stands still and stops
sweeping so as to direct his full attention to the ownership of the broom. The assistant
doesn't actually plead in words, for he is afraid of Blumfeld, who is ostensibly doing his
accounts; moreover, ordinary speech is useless, since the servant can be made to hear
only by excessive shouting. So at first the assistant tugs the servant by the sleeve. The
servant knows, of course, what it is about, glowers at the assistant, shakes his head,
and pulls the broom nearer, up to his chest. Whereupon the assistant folds his hands
and pleads. Actually, he has no hope of achieving anything by pleading, but the
pleading amuses him and so he pleads. The other assistant follows the goings-on with
low laughter and seems to think, heaven knows why, that Blumfeld can't hear him.
The pleading makes not the slightest impression on the servant, who turns around and
thinks he can safely use the broom again. The assistant, however, has skipped after
him on tiptoe and, rubbing his hands together imploringly, now pleads from another
side. This turning of the one and skipping of the other is repeated several times.
Finally the servant feels cut off from all sides and realizes something which, had he
been slightly less stupid, he might have realized from the beginning -- that he will be
tired out long before the assistant. So, looking for help elsewhere, he wags his finger at
the assistant and points at Blumfeld, suggesting that he will lodge a complaint if the
assistant refuses to desist. The assistant realizes that if he is to get the broom at all he'll
have to hurry, so he impudently makes a grab for it. An involuntary scream from the
other assistant heralds the imminent decision. The servant saves the broom once more
$ 227
by taking a step back and dragging it after him. But now the assistant is up in arms:
with open mouth and flashing eyes he leaps forward, the servant tries to escape, but
his old legs wobble rather than run, the assistant tugs at the broom and though he
doesn't succeed in getting it he nevertheless causes it to drop and in this way it is lost
to the servant. Also apparently to the assistant for, the moment the broom falls, all
three, the two assistants and the servant, are paralyzed, for now Blumfeld is bound to
discover everything. And sure enough Blumfeld at his peephole glances up as though
taking in the situation only now. He stares at each one with a stern and searching eye,
even the broom on the floor does not escape his notice. Perhaps the silence has lasted
too long or perhaps the assistant can no longer suppress his desire to sweep, in any
case he bends down -- albeit very carefully, as though about to grab an animal rather
than a broom -- seizes it, passes it over the floor, but, when Blumfeld jumps up and
steps out of his cubicle, promptly casts it aside in alarm. "Both of you back to work!
And not another sound out of you!" shouts Blumfeld, and with an outstretched hand
he directs the two assistants back to their desks. They obey at once, but not
shamefaced or with lowered heads, rather they squeeze themselves stiffly past
Blumfeld, staring him straight in the eye as though trying in this way to stop him from
beating them. Yet they might have learned from experience that Blumfeld on principle
never beats anyone. But they are overapprehensive, and without any tact keep trying
to protect their real or imaginary rights.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 228
The Warden of the Tomb
Small workroom, high window, beyond it a bare treetop. PRINCE (at writing table,
leaning back in chair, looking out of window). CHAMBERLAIN (white beard,
youthfully squeezed into tight jacket, standing against wall near center door).
Pause.
 PRINCE (turning from window): Well?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I cannot recommend it, your Highness.
 PRINCE: Why?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I can't quite formulate my objections at the moment. I'm
expressing only a fraction of what's on my mind when I quote the universal saying: Let
the dead rest in peace.
 PRINCE: That's my opinion, too.
 CHAMBERLAIN: In that case I haven't properly understood.
 PRINCE: So it seems.
$ 229
Pause.
 PRINCE: Perhaps the only thing that disconcerts you is that instead of going
ahead with the arrangement, I announced it to you first.
 CHAMBERLAIN: The announcement certainly burdens me with a great
responsibility which I must endeavor to live up to.
 PRINCE: Don't speak of responsibility!
Pause.
 PRINCE: Let's see. Hitherto the tomb in the Friedrichspark has been guarded
by a warden who lives in a lodge at the park's entrance. Was there anything wrong
with this?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Certainly not. The tomb is more than four hundred years
old and has always been guarded in this way.
 PRINCE: It could be an abuse. But it isn't an abuse, is it?
 CHAMBERLAIN: It is a necessary arrangement.
 PRINCE: All right then, a necessary arrangement. I've been here in the castle
quite some time now, have gained some insight into details which hitherto have been
entrusted to strangers -- they manage fairly well -- and I've come to this conclusion:
the Warden up there in the park is not enough. There must also be a guard down in
the tomb. It probably won't be a pleasant job. But experience has proved that willing
and suitable people can be found for any job.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Needless to say, any orders issued by your Highness will be
carried out, even if the necessity of the order is not fully understood.
$ 230
 PRINCE (starting up): Necessity! Do you mean to say that a guard at the park
gate is necessary? The Friedrichspark belongs to the castle park, is entirely surrounded
by it. The castle park itself is amply guarded -- by the army, what's more. So why a
special guard for the Friedrichspark? Isn't this a mere formality? A pleasant deathbed
for the wretched old man who is keeping watch there?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Formality it is, but a necessary one. A demonstration of
reverence for the illustrious dead.
 PRINCE: And what about the guard in the tomb itself?
 CHAMBERLAIN: In my opinion this would have a police connotation. It
would mean a real guarding of unreal things beyond the human sphere.
 PRINCE: For my family this tomb represents the frontier between the Human
and the Other, and it's on this frontier that I wish to post a guard. As for the police
connotation, as you call it, we can question the Warden himself. I've sent for him.
(Rings a bell.)
 CHAMBERLAIN: He's a confused old man, if I may say so, already quite out of
hand.
 PRINCE: If that's so, all the more reason for strengthening the guard in the way
I've suggested.
(Enter servant.)
 PRINCE: The Warden of the tomb!
(Servant leads in Warden, holding him tight around the waist to prevent him
from collapsing. Ancient red livery hanging loosely about Warden, brightly polished
$ 231
silver buttons, several decorations. Cap in hand, he trembles under the gentlemen's
gaze.)
 PRINCE: Put him on the divan!
(Servant lays him down and goes off. Pause. A faint rattling in Warden's throat.)
 PRINCE (again in armchair): Can you hear?
 WARDEN (tries to answer but fails, is too exhausted, sinks back again).
 PRINCE: Try to pull yourself together. We're waiting.
 CHAMBERLAIN (leaning over Prince): What could this man give information
about? And credible and important information at that? He ought to be taken straight
to bed.
 WARDEN: Not to bed -- still strong -- fairly -- can still hold my end up.
 PRINCE: So you should. You've only just turned sixty. Granted, you look very
weak.
 WARDEN: I'll pick up in no time -- feel better in a minute.
 PRINCE: It wasn't meant as a reproach. I'm only sorry you aren't feeling well.
Have you anything to complain about?
 WARDEN: Hard work -- hard work -- not complaining -- but very weak --
wrestling bouts every night.
 PRINCE: What d'you say?
$ 232
 WARDEN: Hard work.
 PRINCE: You said something else.
 WARDEN: Wrestling bouts.
 PRINCE: Wrestling bouts? What kind of wrestling bouts?
 WARDEN: With the blessed ancestors.
 PRINCE: I don't understand. D'you have bad dreams?
 WARDEN: No dreams -- don't sleep.
 PRINCE: Then let's hear about these -- these wrestling bouts.
 WARDEN (remains silent).
 PRINCE (to Chamberlain): Why doesn't he speak?
 CHAMBERLAIN (hurrying to Warden): He may die any minute.
 PRINCE (stands up).
WARDEN (as Chamberlain touches him): Don't, don't, don't! (Fights off
Chamberlain's hands, then collapses in tears.)
PRINCE: We're tormenting him.
 CHAMBERLAIN: How?
 PRINCE: I don't know.
$ 233
 CHAMBERLAIN: Coming to the castle, having to present himself here, the
sight of your Highness, this questioning -- he no longer has the wits to face all this.
 PRINCE (still staring at the Warden): That's not it. (Goes to divan, bends over
Warden, takes his little skull in his hands.) Mustn't cry. What are you crying for? We
wish you well. I realize your job isn't easy. You've certainly deserved well of my family.
So stop crying and tell us all about it.
 WARDEN: But I'm so afraid of that gentleman there -- (Looks at Chamberlain,
more threateningly than afraid.)
PRINCE (to Chamberlain): If we want him to talk I'm afraid you'll have to leave.
 CHAMBERLAIN: But look, your Highness, he's foaming at the mouth. He's
seriously ill.
 PRINCE (absent-mindedly): Please go, it won't take long.
Exit Chamberlain.
Prince sits on edge of divan.
Pause.
 PRINCE: Why were you afraid of him?
 WARDEN (surprisingly composed): I wasn't afraid. Me afraid of a servant?
 PRINCE: He's not a servant. He's a Count, free and rich.
 WARDEN: A servant all the same, you are the master.
$ 234
 PRINCE: If you like it that way. But you said yourself that you were afraid of
him.
 WARDEN: I didn't want to say things in front of him which are meant only for
you. Haven't I already said too much in front of him?
 PRINCE: So we're on terms of intimacy, and yet today is the first time I've seen
you.
 WARDEN: Seen for the first time, but you've always known that I (raising his
forefinger) hold the most important position at Court. You even acknowledged it
publicly by awarding me the medal "Red-as-Fire." Here! (Holds up the medal on his
coat.)
 PRINCE: No, that's the medal for twenty-five years' service at Court. My
grandfather gave you that. But I'll decorate you, too.
 WARDEN: Do as you please and grant me whatever you think I deserve. I've
acted as your tomb Warden for thirty years.
 PRINCE: Not mine. My reign has lasted hardly a year.
 WARDEN (lost in thought): Thirty years.
Pause.
WARDEN (remembering only half of the Prince's remark): Nights last years
there.
 PRINCE: I haven't yet had a report from your office. What's your work like?
 WARDEN: Every night the same. Every night till the heart beats as if it were
$ 235
about to burst.
 PRINCE: Is it only night duty, then? Night duty for an old man like you?
 WARDEN: That's just it, your Highness. It's day duty. A loafer's job. There one
sits, at the front door, with one's mouth open in the sunshine. Sometimes the
watchdog pats one on the knee with its paws, and then lies down again. That's all that
ever happens.
 PRINCE: Well?
 WARDEN (nodding): But it has been changed to night duty.
 PRINCE: By whom?
 WARDEN: By the lords of the tomb.
 PRINCE: You know them?
 WARDEN: Yes.
 PRINCE: They come to see you?
 WARDEN: Yes.
 PRINCE: Last night, too?
 WARDEN: Last night, too.
 PRINCE: What was it like?
 WARDEN (sitting up straight): Same as usual.
$ 236
Prince stands up.
 WARDEN: Same as usual. Quiet till midnight. I'm lying in bed -- excuse me --
smoking my pipe. My granddaughter is asleep in the next bed. At midnight comes the
first knock at the window. I look at the clock. Always to the minute. Two more knocks,
they mingle with the striking of the tower clock, but I can still hear them. These are no
human knuckles. But I know all that and don't budge. Then it clears its throat outside,
it's surprised that in spite of all that knocking I haven't opened the window. Let his
princely Highness be surprised! The old Warden is still there! (Shows his fist.)
 PRINCE: You're threatening me?
 WARDEN (doesn't immediately understand): Not you. The one at the window!
 PRINCE: Who is it?
 WARDEN: He shows himself at once. All of a sudden window and shutters are
opened. I just have time to throw the blanket over my grandchild's face. The storm
blows in, promptly puts the light out. Duke Friedrich! His face with beard and hair
completely fills my poor window. How he has grown throughout the centuries! When
he opens his mouth to speak the wind blows his old beard between his teeth and he
bites on it.
 PRINCE: Just a moment. You say Duke Friedrich? Which Friedrich?
 WARDEN: Duke Friedrich, just Duke Friedrich.
 PRINCE: Is that the name he gives?
 WARDEN (anxiously): No, he doesn't give it.
 PRINCE: And yet you know -- (breaking off) -- Go on!
$ 237
 WARDEN: Shall I go on?
 PRINCE: Of course. All this very much concerns me. There must be an error in
the distribution of labor. You're overworked.
 WARDEN (kneeling): Don't take my job away, your Highness. Having lived for
you all these years, let me also die for you! Don't wall up the grave I'm struggling
toward. I serve willingly and am still strong enough to serve. To be granted an
audience like today's, to take a rest with my master -- this gives me strength for ten
years.
 PRINCE (putting Warden back on divan): No one's going to take your job from
you. How could I get along without your experience? But I'll appoint another Warden,
then you'll become Head Warden.
 WARDEN: Am I not good enough? Have I ever let anyone pass?
 PRINCE: Into the Friedrichspark?
 WARDEN: No, out of the park. Who'd want to come in? If ever anyone stops at
the railing I beckon to him from the window and he runs away. But out! Everyone
wants to get out. After midnight you can see all the voices from the grave assembled
around my house. I think it's only because they are so closely packed together that the
whole lot of them don't burst through my narrow window. If it gets too bad, however,
I grab the lantern from under my bed, swing it high, and with laughter and moaning
these incredible creatures scatter in all directions. Then I can hear them rustling even
in the farthest bush at the end of the park. But they soon gather together again.
 PRINCE: And do they tell you what they want?
 WARDEN: First they give orders. Especially Duke Friedrich. No living being
$ 238
could be so confident. Every night for thirty years he has been expecting me to give in.
 PRINCE: If he has been coming for thirty years it can't be Duke Friedrich, for
he has been dead only fifteen years. On the other hand, he is the only one of that name
in the tomb.
 WARDEN (too carried away by his story}: That I don't know, your Highness, I
never went to school. I only know how he begins. "Old dog," he begins at the window,
"the gentlemen are knocking and you just stay in your filthy bed." They have a
particular grudge against beds, by the way. And now every night we have the same
conversation, he outside, I opposite him, my back to the door. I say: "I'm only on day
duty." The Duke turns and shouts into the park: "He's only on day duty." Whereupon
all the assembled aristocracy burst out laughing. Then the Duke says to me again: "But
it is day." I say curtly: "You're wrong." The Duke: "Night or day, open the door." I:
"That's against my orders." And with my pipe I point at a notice on the door. The
Duke: "But you're our Warden." I: "Your Warden, but employed by the reigning
Prince." He: "Our Warden, that's the main thing. So open up, and be quick about it." I:
"No." He: "Idiot, you'll lose your job. Prince Leo has invited us for today."
 PRINCE (quickly): I?
 WARDEN: You.
Pause.
 WARDEN: When I hear your name I lose my firmness. That's why I have
always taken care to lean against the door which is almost the only thing that holds me
up. Outside, everyone's singing your name. "Where's the invitation?" I ask weakly.
"Bedbug!" he shouts, "you doubt my ducal word?" I say: "I have no orders, so I won't
open, I won't open, I won't open!" -- "He won't open!" shouts the Duke outside. "So
come on, all of you, the whole dynasty! At the door! We'll open it ourselves." And a
$ 239
moment later there's nothing under my window.
Pause.
 PRINCE: Is that all?
 WARDEN: All? My real service begins only now. I rush out of the door, around
the house, and promptly run into the Duke and there we are, locked in combat. He so
big, I so small, he so broad, I so thin, I can fight only with his feet, but now and again
he lifts me up in the air and then I fight up there, too. All his comrades stand around
in a circle and make fun of me. One, for instance, cuts open my trousers behind and
they all play with the tail of my shirt while I'm fighting. Can't understand why they
laugh, as until now I've always won.
 PRINCE: How is it possible for you to win? Have you any weapons?
 WARDEN: I carried weapons only during the first years. What good could they
be against him? They only hampered me. We just fight with our fists, or rather with
the strength of our breath. And you're in my thoughts all the time.
Pause.
 WARDEN: But I never doubt my victory. Only sometimes I'm afraid the Duke
will let me slip through his fingers and forget that he's fighting.
 PRINCE: And when do you win?
 WARDEN: At dawn. Then he throws me down and spits at me. That's his
confession of defeat. But I have to go on lying there for an hour before I can get my
breath back properly.
Pause.
$ 240
 PRINCE (standing up): But tell me, don't you know what they really want?
 WARDEN: To get out of the park.
 PRINCE: But why?
 WARDEN: That I don't know.
 PRINCE: Haven't you asked?
 WARDEN: No.
 PRINCE: Why not?
 WARDEN: It would embarrass me. But if you wish, I'll ask them today.
 PRINCE (shocked, loud): Today!
 WARDEN (knowingly): Yes, today.
 PRINCE: And you can't even guess what they want?
 WARDEN (thoughtfully): No.
Pause.
 WARDEN: Perhaps I ought to add that sometimes in the early mornings while
I'm lying there trying to get my breath and even too weak to open my eyes, there
comes a delicate, moist creature, rather hairy to the touch, a latecomer, the Countess
Isabella. She runs her hand all over me, catches hold of my beard, her whole body
glides along my neck, under my chin, and she's in the habit of saying: "Not the others,
but me -- let me out." I shake my head as much as I can. "I want to go to Prince Leo, to
$ 241
offer him my hand." I keep on shaking my head. "But me, me!" I can still hear her
crying, then she's gone. And my granddaughter appears with blankets, wraps me up in
them, and waits with me till I can walk on my own. An exceptionally good girl.
 PRINCE: Isabella? The name's unknown to me.
Pause.
 PRINCE: To offer me her hand! (Goes to window, looks out.)
 Enter servant through center door.
 SERVANT: Her Highness, m'lady the Princess, awaits you.
 PRINCE (looks absent-mindedly at servant. Turns to Warden): Wait till I come
back. (Exit left.)
Chamberlain enters at once through center door, then the Lord High Steward
(youngish man in officer's uniform) through door on right.
 WARDEN (ducks behind divan and flourishes his hands as though seeing
ghosts).
 STEWARD: The Prince has gone?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Following your advice, the Princess sent for him.
 STEWARD: Good. (Turns suddenly, bends over behind divan.) And you,
miserable ghost, you actually dare to appear here in the princely castle! Aren't you
afraid of the great boot that'll kick you through the door?
 WARDEN: I'm -- I'm --
$ 242
 STEWARD: Quiet, first of all keep quiet, don't utter -- and sit down here in this
corner! (To Chamberlain) I thank you for informing me about the latest princely
whim.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You inquired about it.
 STEWARD: Even so. And now a confidential word. Purposely in front of that
creature there. You, Count, are flirting with the opposition.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Is that an accusation?
 STEWARD: An apprehension, so far.
 CHAMBERLAIN: In that case I can answer. I'm not flirting with the
opposition, for I don't know it. I can feel the currents, but I steer clear of them. I still
represent the open policy that prevailed under Duke Friedrich. At that time the only
policy at Court was to serve the Prince. This was made easier by his being a bachelor,
but it should never be difficult.
 STEWARD: Very sensible -- except that one's own nose, however reliable,
never points the right way all the time. This can only be achieved by reason. But
reason must make decisions. Let's assume the Prince is on the wrong track: does one
serve him better by following him down or, with all due respect, by chasing him back?
Undoubtedly by chasing him back.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You came here with the Princess from a foreign Court, have
spent a mere six months here, and you already think you can tell the difference
between good and evil in the complicated conditions of this Court?
 STEWARD: He who blinks sees only complications. He who keeps his eyes
open sees the eternal truth in the first hours as clearly as after a hundred years.
$ 243
Admittedly, in this case, a sad truth which in the next few days, however, may take a
decisive turn for the better.
 CHAMBERLAIN: I cannot believe that the decision which you wish to bring
about and which I know only from your announcement will be a good one. I'm afraid
you misunderstand our Prince, the Court, and everything here.
 STEWARD: Whether understood or misunderstood, the present situation is
unbearable.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Unbearable it may be, but it is founded on the nature of
things as they are here, and we are prepared to bear it to the end.
 STEWARD: But not the Princess, not I, not those who are on our side.
 CHAMBERLAIN: What do you find so unbearable?
 STEWARD: Just because the decision is imminent I want to speak frankly. The
Prince has a dual nature. The one, concerning itself with government, wavers absentmindedly in public, disregarding its own privileges. The other nature admittedly
searches very painstakingly for a strengthening of its foundations. It searches for them
in the past, delving deeper and deeper. What a misunderstanding of the situation! A
misunderstanding that doesn't lack greatness -- although its defectiveness is even
greater than its appearance. Can you fail to see that?
 CHAMBERLAIN: It's not the description I object to, it's the interpretation.
 STEWARD: The interpretation? And to think that in the hope of getting you to
agree, I have judged the situation with more leniency than I actually feel! And I'm still
withholding my verdict in order to spare you. But just one thing: in reality the Prince
does not need a strengthening of his foundations. If he uses all the power at present at
$ 244
his disposal, he'll find it sufficient to bring about everything that the most extreme
responsibility before God and man may demand of him. But he shies away from the
balance of life, he's on his way to becoming a tyrant.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He with his modest character!
 STEWARD: It's the modesty of the one half, for he needs all his energy for the
second half which scrapes together the foundation needed to build something like the
Tower of Babel. To hinder this work should be the sole policy of all those who are
interested in their personal existence, in the principality, in the Princess, and possibly
even in the Prince.
 CHAMBERLAIN: "Possibly even" -- you're very candid. To be equally frank,
your candor makes me tremble at the imminent decision. And I regret, as I've recently
come to regret more and more, that I'm devoted to the Prince almost to the point of
helplessness.
 STEWARD: Everything is clear. You are not flirting with the opposition. In
fact, you are even holding out a hand. Only one, which is commendable for an old
courtier. And yet your only hope is that our great example carries you along.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Whatever I can do to prevent it, I shall do.
 STEWARD: It doesn't frighten me anymore. (Pointing to the Warden.) And you
who've been sitting there so quietly, have you understood everything that's been said?
 CHAMBERLAIN: The Warden of the tomb?
 STEWARD: The Warden of the tomb. One must probably be a stranger to size
him up. Isn't that so, old boy, you little old screech-owl, you! Have you ever seen him
flying through the forest in the evening, out of any gun's reach? But by day he ducks at
$ 245
the slightest move.
 CHAMBERLAIN: I don't understand.
 WARDEN (almost in tears): You're scolding me, sir, and I don't know why.
Please let me go home. I'm really not evil, I'm just the Warden of the tomb.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You mistrust him.
 STEWARD: Mistrust? No, he's too insignificant for that. But I want to keep an
eye on him. For I think -- call it whim or superstition, if you like -- that he's not just a
mere tool of evil, but an upright, active worker for evil.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He has been serving the Court quietly for thirty years --
possibly without ever having been in the castle.
 STEWARD: Oh, moles like him build long passages before they emerge.
(Suddenly turns to Warden.) But first of all, away with this one! (To servant) Take him
to the Friedrichspark, stay with him, and don't let him out until further notice.
 WARDEN (very frightened): I'm supposed to wait for his Highness, the Prince.
 STEWARD: An error. -- Off with you.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He must be treated with care. He's an old and sick man, and
for some reason the Prince sets store by him.
 WARDEN (bowing low before Chamberlain).
 STEWARD: What? (To servant) Treat him carefully, but for God's sake get him
out of here. Quick!
$ 246
 SERVANT (about to grab him).
 CHAMBERLAIN (stepping between them): No, we must get a carriage.
 STEWARD: It's the air at this Court. I can't taste a grain of salt anywhere. All
right then, a carriage. You take the treasure away in a carriage. But now, out of the
room with you both! (To Chamberlain) Your behavior shows me --
 WARDEN (collapses, with a little scream, on way to door).
 STEWARD (stamping his foot): Is it impossible to get rid of him? Pick him up
in your arms if there's no other way. Can't you understand what's expected of you!
 CHAMBERLAIN: The Prince!
 SERVANT (opening door at left).
 STEWARD: Ah! (Glances at Warden.) I should have known that ghosts cannot
be transported.
 PRINCE (enters with quick step, behind him the Princess, dark young woman
with teeth clenched, stops in doorway).
 PRINCE: What's happened?
 STEWARD: The Warden felt ill, I was about to have him taken away.
 PRINCE: I should have been notified. Has the doctor been sent for?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I'll have him called. (Hurries out by center door, returns at
once.)
$ 247
 PRINCE (kneeling beside Warden): Prepare a bed for him! Fetch a stretcher! Is
the doctor on his way? He's taking a long time. The pulse is very weak. I can't hear the
heart. These miserable ribs! How worn out this body is! (Stands up suddenly, fetches a
glass of water, stares about him.) One is so helpless. (Kneels down again, moistens the
Warden's face.) Now he's breathing better. It won't be so bad. Healthy stock, the kind
that doesn't give up, even in extremity. But the doctor, the doctor!
(While he glances toward the door, the Warden raises his hand and caresses the
Prince's cheek. Princess turns her head away, toward the window. Enter servants with
stretcher, Prince helps to lift Warden.)
 PRINCE: Handle him gently. Oh, you with your great claws! Lift his head a
little. Nearer the stretcher. The pillow further down his back. His arm! His arm! You're
all bad, bad nurses! I wonder if you'll ever be as tired as this man on the stretcher? --
There we are -- and now with slow -- slow -- steps. And above all, steadily. (Turning
in door to Princess.) Here then is the Warden of the tomb.
 PRINCESS (nods).
PRINCE: I had intended to show him to you differently. (After taking another
step.) Aren't you coming along?
 PRINCESS: I'm so tired.
 PRINCE: The moment I've talked to the doctor I'll come back. And you,
gentlemen, who wish to make your report, wait for me.
 STEWARD (to Princess): Does your Highness require my services?
 PRINCESS: Always. I am grateful for your vigilance. Do not abandon it, even if
today it was in vain. Everything is at stake. You see more than I. I am always in my
$ 248
rooms. But I know it will get more and more gloomy. This autumn is sad beyond
belief.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
A Country Doctor
 I WAS in great perplexity; I had to start on an urgent journey; a seriously ill
patient was waiting for me in a village ten miles off; a thick blizzard of snow filled all
the wide spaces between him and me; I had a gig, a light gig with big wheels, exactly
right for our country roads; muffled in furs, my bag of instruments in my hand, I was
in the courtyard all ready for the journey; but there was no horse to be had, no horse.
My own horse had died in the night, worn out by the fatigues of this icy winter; my
servant girl was now running around the village trying to borrow a horse; but it was
hopeless, I knew it, and I stood there forlornly, with the snow gathering more and
more thickly upon me, more and more unable to move. In the gateway the girl
appeared, alone, and waved the lantern; of course, who would lend a horse at this time
$ 249
for such a journey? I strode through the courtyard once more; I could see no way out;
in my confused distress I kicked at the dilapidated door of the yearlong uninhabited
pigsty. It flew open and flapped to and fro on its hinges. A steam and smell as of horses
came out from it. A dim stable lantern was swinging inside from a rope. A man,
crouching on his hams in that low space, showed an open blue-eyed face. "Shall I yoke
up?" he asked, crawling out on all fours. I did not know what to say and merely
stooped down to see what else was in the sty. The servant girl was standing beside me.
"You never know what you're going to find in your own house," she said, and we both
laughed. "Hey there, Brother, hey there, Sister!" called the groom, and two horses,
enormous creatures with powerful flanks, one after the other, their legs tucked close to
their bodies, each well-shaped head lowered like a camel's, by sheer strength of
buttocking squeezed out through the door hole which they filled entirely. But at once
they were standing up, their legs long and their bodies steaming thickly. "Give him a
hand," I said, and the willing girl hurried to help the groom with the harnessing. Yet
hardly was she beside him when the groom clipped hold of her and pushed his face
against hers. She screamed and fled back to me; on her cheek stood out in red the
marks of two rows of teeth. "You brute," I yelled in fury, "do you want a whipping?" but
in the same moment reflected that the man was a stranger; that I did not know where
he came from, and that of his own free will he was helping me out when everyone else
had failed me. As if he knew my thoughts he took no offense at my threat but, still
busied with the horses, only turned around once toward me. "Get in," he said then, and
indeed: everything was ready. A magnificent pair of horses, I observed, such as I had
never sat behind, and I climbed in happily. "But I'll drive, you don't know the way," I
said. "Of course," said he, "I'm not coming with you anyway, I'm staying with Rose."
"No," shrieked Rose, fleeing into the house with a justified presentiment that her fate
was inescapable; I heard the door chain rattle as she put it up; I heard the key turn in
the lock; I could see, moreover, how she put out the lights in the entrance hall and in
further flight all though the rooms to keep herself from being discovered. "You're
coming with me," I said to the groom, "or I won't go, urgent as my journey is. I'm not
thinking of paying for it by handing the girl over to you." "Gee up!" he said; clapped his
$ 250
hands; the gig whirled off like a log in a freshet; I could just hear the door of my house
splitting and bursting as the groom charged at it and then I was deafened and blinded
by a storming rush that steadily buffeted all my senses. But this only for a moment,
since, as if my patient's farmyard had opened out just before my courtyard gate, I was
already there; the horses had come quietly to a standstill; the blizzard had stopped;
moonlight all around; my patient's parents hurried out of the house, his sister behind
them; I was almost lifted out of the gig; from their confused ejaculations I gathered not
a word; in the sickroom the air was almost unbreathable; the neglected stove was
smoking; I wanted to push open a window; but first I had to look at my patient. Gaunt,
without any fever, not cold, not warm, with vacant eyes, without a shirt, the youngster
heaved himself up from under the feather bedding, threw his arms around my neck,
and whispered in my ear: "Doctor, let me die." I glanced around the room; no one had
heard it; the parents were leaning forward in silence waiting for my verdict; the sister
had set a chair for my handbag; I opened the bag and hunted among my instruments;
the boy kept clutching at me from his bed to remind me of his entreaty; I picked up a
pair of tweezers, examined them in the candlelight, and laid them down again. "Yes," I
thought blasphemously, "in cases like this the gods are helpful, send the missing horse,
add to it a second because of the urgency, and to crown everything bestow even a
groom --" And only now did I remember Rose again; what was I to do, how could I
rescue her, how could I pull her away from under that groom at ten miles' distance,
with a team of horses I couldn't control. These horses, now, they had somehow slipped
the reins loose, pushed the windows open from outside, I did not know how; each of
them had stuck a head in at a window and, quite unmoved by the startled cries of the
family, stood eyeing the patient. "Better go back at once," I thought, as if the horses
were summoning me to the return journey, yet I permitted the patient's sister, who
fancied that I was dazed by the heat, to take my fur coat from me. A glass of rum was
poured out for me, the old man clapped me on the shoulder, a familiarity justified by
this offer of his treasure. I shook my head; in the narrow confines of the old man's
thoughts I felt ill; that was my only reason for refusing the drink. The mother stood by
the bedside and cajoled me toward it; I yielded, and, while one of the horses whinnied
$ 251
loudly to the ceiling, laid my head to the boy's breast, which shivered under my wet
beard. I confirmed what I already knew; the boy was quite sound, something a little
wrong with his circulation, saturated with coffee by his solicitous mother, but sound
and best turned out of bed with one shove. I am no world reformer and so I let him lie.
I was the district doctor and did my duty to the uttermost, to the point where it
became almost too much. I was badly paid and yet generous and helpful to the poor. I
had still to see that Rose was all right, and then the boy might have his way and I
wanted to die too. What was I doing there in that endless winter! My horse was dead,
and not a single person in the village would lend me another. I had to get my team out
of the pigsty; if they hadn't chanced to be horses I should have had to travel with
swine. That was how it was. And I nodded to the family. They knew nothing about it,
and, had they known, would not have believed it. To write prescriptions is easy, but to
come to an understanding with people is hard. Well, this should be the end of my visit,
I had once more been called out needlessly, I was used to that, the whole district made
my life a torment with my night bell, but that I should have to sacrifice Rose this time
as well, the pretty girl who had lived in my house for years almost without my noticing
her -- that sacrifice was too much to ask, and I had somehow to get it reasoned out in
my head with the help of what craft I could muster, in order not to let fly at this family,
which with the best will in the world could not restore Rose to me. But as I shut my
bag and put an arm out for my fur coat, the family meanwhile standing together, the
father sniffing at the glass of rum in his hand, the mother, apparently disappointed in
me -- why, what do people expect? -- biting her lips with tears in her eyes, the sister
fluttering a blood-soaked towel, I was somehow ready to admit conditionally that the
boy might be ill after all. I went toward him, he welcomed me smiling as if I were
bringing him the most nourishing invalid broth -- ah, now both horses were
whinnying together; the noise, I suppose, was ordained by heaven to assist my
examination of the patient -- and this time I discovered that the boy was indeed ill. In
his right side, near the hip, was an open wound as big as the palm of my hand. Rosered, in many variations of shade, dark in the hollows, lighter at the edges, softly
granulated, with irregular clots of blood, open as a surface mine to the daylight. That
$ 252
was how it looked from a distance. But on a closer inspection there was another
complication. I could not help a low whistle of surprise. Worms, as thick and as long
as my little finger, themselves rose-red and blood-spotted as well, were wriggling from
their fastness in the interior of the wound toward the light, with small white heads and
many little legs. Poor boy, you were past helping. I had discovered your great wound;
this blossom in your side was destroying you. The family was pleased; they saw me
busying myself; the sister told the mother, the mother the father, the father told
several guests who were coming in, through the moonlight at the open door, walking
on tiptoe, keeping their balance with outstretched arms. "Will you save me?"
whispered the boy with a sob, quite blinded by the life within his wound. That is what
people are like in my district. Always expecting the impossible from the doctor. They
have lost their ancient beliefs; the parson sits at home and unravels his vestments, one
after another; but the doctor is supposed to be omnipotent with his merciful surgeon's
hand. Well, as it pleases them; I have not thrust my services on them; if they misuse
me for sacred ends, I let that happen to me too; what better do I want, old country
doctor that I am, bereft of my servant girl! And so they came, the family and the village
elders, and stripped my clothes off me; a school choir with the teacher at the head of it
stood before the house and sang these words to an utterly simple tune:
 Strip his clothes off, then he'll heal us,
 If he doesn't, kill him dead!
 Only a doctor, only a doctor.
Then my clothes were off and I looked at the people quietly, my fingers in my beard
and my head cocked to one side. I was altogether composed and equal to the situation
$ 253
and remained so, although it was no help to me, since they now took me by the head
and feet and carried me to the bed. They laid me down in it next to the wall, on the
side of the wound. Then they all left the room; the door was shut; the singing stopped;
clouds covered the moon; the bedding was warm around me; the horses' heads in the
open windows wavered like shadows. "Do you know," said a voice in my ear, "I have
very little confidence in you. Why, you were only blown in here, you didn't come on
your own feet. Instead of helping me, you're cramping me on my deathbed. What I'd
like best is to scratch your eyes out." "Right," I said, "it is a shame. And yet I am a
doctor. What am I to do? Believe me, it is not too easy for me either." "Am I supposed
to be content with this apology? Oh, I must be, I can't help it. I always have to put up
with things. A fine wound is all I brought into the world; that was my sole
endowment." "My young friend," said I, "your mistake is: you have not a wide enough
view. I have been in all the sickrooms, far and wide, and I tell you: your wound is not
so bad. Done in a tight corner with two strokes of the ax. Many a one proffers his side
and can hardly hear the ax in the forest, far less that it is coming nearer to him." "Is
that really so, or are you deluding me in my fever?" "It is really so, take the word of
honor of an official doctor." And he took it and lay still. But now it was time for me to
think of escaping. The horses were still standing faithfully in their places. My clothes,
my fur coat, my bag were quickly collected; I didn't want to waste time dressing; if the
horses raced home as they had come, I should only be springing, as it were, out of this
bed into my own. Obediently a horse backed away from the window; I threw my
bundle into the gig; the fur coat missed its mark and was caught on a hook only by the
sleeve. Good enough. I swung myself onto the horse. With the reins loosely trailing,
one horse barely fastened to the other, the gig swaying behind, my fur coat last of all in
the snow. "Gee up!" I said, but there was no galloping; slowly, like old men, we crawled
through the snowy wastes; a long time echoed behind us the new but faulty song of the
children:
$ 254
 O be joyful, all you patients,
 The doctor's laid in bed beside you!
Never shall I reach home at this rate; my flourishing practice is done for; my successor
is robbing me, but in vain, for he cannot take my place; in my house the disgusting
groom is raging; Rose is his victim; I do not want to think about it anymore. Naked,
exposed to the frost of this most unhappy of ages, with an earthly vehicle, unearthly
horses, old man that I am, I wander astray. My fur coat is hanging from the back of the
gig, but I cannot reach it, and none of my limber pack of patients lifts a finger.
Betrayed! Betrayed! A false alarm on the night bell once answered -- it cannot be made
good, not ever.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Hunter Gracchus
$ 255
 Two BOYS were sitting on the harbor wall playing with dice. A man was reading
a newspaper on the steps of the monument, resting in the shadow of a hero who was
flourishing his sword on high. A girl was filling her bucket at the fountain. A fruitseller was lying beside his wares, gazing at the lake. Through the vacant window and
door openings of a cafe one could see two men quite at the back drinking their wine.
The proprietor was sitting at a table in front and dozing. A bark was silently making
for the little harbor, as if borne by invisible means over the water. A man in a blue
blouse climbed ashore and drew the rope through a ring. Behind the boatman two
other men in dark coats with silver buttons carried a bier, on which, beneath a great
flower-patterned fringed silk cloth, a man was apparently lying.
 Nobody on the quay troubled about the newcomers; even when they lowered
the bier to wait for the boatman, who was still occupied with his rope, nobody went
nearer, nobody asked them a question, nobody accorded them an inquisitive glance.
 The pilot was still further detained by a woman who, a child at her breast, now
appeared with loosened hair on the deck of the boat. Then he advanced and indicated
a yellowish two-storeyed house that rose abruptly on the left near the water; the
bearers took up their burden and bore it to the low but gracefully pillared door. A little
boy opened a window just in time to see the party vanishing into the house, then
hastily shut the window again. The door too was now shut; it was of black oak, and
very strongly made. A flock of doves which had been flying around the belfry alighted
in the street before the house. As if their food were stored within, they assembled in
front of the door. One of them flew up to the first storey and pecked at the
windowpane. They were bright-hued, well-tended, lively birds. The woman on the
boat flung grain to them in a wide sweep; they ate it up and flew across to the woman.
 A man in a top hat tied with a band of black crêpe now descended one of the
narrow and very steep lanes that led to the harbor. He glanced around vigilantly,
everything seemed to distress him, his mouth twisted at the sight of some offal in a
$ 256
corner. Fruit skins were lying on the steps of the monument; he swept them off in
passing with his stick. He rapped at the house door, at the same time taking his top hat
from his head with his black-gloved hand. The door was opened at once, and some
fifty little boys appeared in two rows in the long entry hall, and bowed to him.
 The boatman descended the stairs, greeted the gentleman in black, conducted
him up to the first storey, led him around the bright and elegant loggia which
encircled the courtyard, and both of them entered, while the boys pressed after them
at a respectful distance, a cool spacious room looking toward the back, from whose
window no habitation, but only a bare, blackish-gray rocky wall was to be seen. The
bearers were busied in setting up and lighting several long candles at the head of the
bier, yet these did not give light, but only disturbed the shadows which had been
immobile till then, and made them flicker over the walls. The cloth covering the bier
had been thrown back. Lying on it was a man with wildly matted hair, who looked
somewhat like a hunter. He lay without motion and, it seemed, without breathing, his
eyes closed; yet only his trappings indicated that this man was probably dead.
 The gentleman stepped up to the bier, laid his hand on the brow of the man
lying upon it, then kneeled down and prayed. The boatman made a sign to the bearers
to leave the room; they went out, drove away the boys who had gathered outside, and
shut the door. But even that did not seem to satisfy the gentleman, he glanced at the
boatman; the boatman understood, and vanished through a side door into the next
room. At once the man on the bier opened his eyes, turned his face painfully toward
the gentleman, and said: "Who are you?" Without any mark of surprise the gentleman
rose from his kneeling posture and answered: "The Burgomaster of Riva."
 The man on the bier nodded, indicated a chair with a feeble movement of his
arm, and said, after the Burgomaster had accepted his invitation: "I knew that, of
course, Burgomaster, but in the first moments of returning consciousness I always
forget, everything goes around before my eyes, and it is best to ask about anything
$ 257
even if I know. You too probably know that I am the Hunter Gracchus."
 "Certainly," said the Burgomaster. "Your arrival was announced to me during
the night. We had been asleep for a good while. Then toward midnight my wife cried:
'Salvatore' -- that's my name -- 'look at that dove at the window.' It was really a dove,
but as big as a cock. It flew over me and said in my ear: 'Tomorrow the dead Hunter
Gracchus is coming; receive him in the name of the city.' "
 The Hunter nodded and licked his lips with the tip of his tongue: "Yes, the
doves flew here before me. But do you believe, Burgomaster, that I shall remain in
Riva?"
 "I cannot say that yet," replied the Burgomaster. "Are you dead?"
 "Yes," said the Hunter, "as you see. Many years ago, yes, it must be a great many
years ago, I fell from a precipice in the Black Forest -- that is in Germany -- when I was
hunting a chamois. Since then I have been dead."
 "But you are alive too," said the Burgomaster.
 "In a certain sense," said the Hunter, "in a certain sense I am alive too. My
death ship lost its way; a wrong turn of the wheel, a moment's absence of mind on the
pilot's part, the distraction of my lovely native country, I cannot tell what it was; I only
know this, that I remained on earth and that ever since my ship has sailed earthly
waters. So I, who asked for nothing better than to live among my mountains, travel
after my death through all the lands of the earth."
 "And you have no part in the other world?" asked the Burgomaster, knitting his
brow.
 "I am forever." replied the Hunter, "on the great stair that leads up to it. On that
$ 258
infinitely wide and spacious stair I clamber about, sometimes up, sometimes down,
sometimes on the right, sometimes on the left, always in motion. The Hunter has been
turned into a butterfly. Do not laugh."
 "I am not laughing," said the Burgomaster in self-defense.
 "That is very good of you," said the Hunter. "I am always in motion. But when I
make a supreme flight and see the gate actually shining before me I awaken presently
on my old ship, still stranded forlornly in some earthly sea or other. The fundamental
error of my onetime death grins at me as I lie in my cabin. Julia, the wife of the pilot,
knocks at the door and brings me on my bier the morning drink of the land whose
coasts we chance to be passing. I lie on a wooden pallet, I wear -- it cannot be a
pleasure to look at me -- a filthy winding sheet, my hair and beard, black tinged with
gray, have grown together inextricably, my limbs are covered with a great floweredpatterned woman's shawl with long fringes. A sacramental candle stands at my head
and lights me. On the wall opposite me is a little picture, evidently of a bushman who
is aiming his spear at me and taking cover as best he can behind a beautifully painted
shield. On shipboard one often comes across silly pictures, but that is the silliest of
them all. Otherwise my wooden cage is quite empty. Through a hole in the side the
warm airs of the southern night come in, and I hear the water slapping against the old
boat. "I have lain here ever since the time when, as the Hunter Gracchus living in the
Black Forest, I followed a chamois and fell from a precipice. Everything happened in
good order. I pursued, I fell, bled to death in a ravine, died, and this ship should have
conveyed me to the next world. I can still remember how gladly I stretched myself out
on this pallet for the first time. Never did the mountains listen to such songs from me
as these shadowy walls did then.
 "I had been glad to live and I was glad to die. Before I stepped aboard, I joyfully
flung away my wretched load of ammunition, my knapsack, my hunting rifle that I had
always been proud to carry, and I slipped into my winding sheet like a girl into her
$ 259
marriage dress. I lay and waited. Then came the mishap."
 "A terrible fate," said the Burgomaster, raising his hand defensively. "And you
bear no blame for it?"
 "None," said the Hunter. "I was a hunter; was there any sin in that? I followed
my calling as a hunter in the Black Forest, where there were still wolves in those days. I
lay in ambush, shot, hit my mark, flayed the skins from my victims: was there any sin
in that? My labors were blessed. 'The Great Hunter of the Black Forest' was the name I
was given. Was there any sin in that?"
 "I am not called upon to decide that," said the Burgomaster, "but to me also
there seems to be no sin in such things. But then, whose is the guilt?"
 "The boatman's," said the Hunter. "Nobody will read what I say here, no one
will come to help me; even if all the people were commanded to help me, every door
and window would remain shut, everybody would take to bed and draw the bedclothes
over his head, the whole earth would become an inn for the night. And there is sense
in that, for nobody knows of me, and if anyone knew he would not know where I could
be found, and if he knew where I could be found, he would not know how to deal with
me, he would not know how to help me. The thought of helping me is an illness that
has to be cured by taking to one's bed.
 "I know that, and so I do not shout to summon help, even though at moments -
- when I lose control over myself, as I have done just now, for instance -- I think
seriously of it. But to drive out such thoughts I need only look around me and verify
where I am, and -- I can safely assert -- have been for hundreds of years."
 "Extraordinary," said the Burgomaster, "extraordinary. And now do you think
of staying here in Riva with us?"
$ 260
 "I think not," said the Hunter with a smile, and, to excuse himself, he laid his
hand on the Burgomaster's knee. "I am here, more than that I do not know, further
than that I cannot go. My ship has no rudder, and it is driven by the wind that blows in
the undermost regions of death."
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Hunter Gracchus: A Fragment
 Is IT TRUE, Hunter Gracchus, that you have been cruising about in this old boat
for hundreds of years?
 For fifteen hundred years.
 And always in this ship?
 Always in this bark. Bark, I believe, is the correct expression. You aren't
familiar with nautical matters?
$ 261
 No, I never gave them a thought until today, until I heard about you, until I
boarded your ship.
 Don't apologize. I'm from the interior, too. Never been a seafarer, never wanted
to be one, mountains and forests were my friends, and now -- most ancient of
seafarers, Hunter Gracchus, patron saint of sailors, Hunter Gracchus -- the cabin boy
shivering with fear in the crow's-nest in the stormy night prays to me with wringing
hands. Don't laugh.
 Me laugh? Certainly not. With a beating heart I stood before your cabin door,
with a beating heart I entered. Your friendly manner has calmed me a little, but I'll
never forget whose guest I am.
 You're right, of course. However it may be, I am Hunter Gracchus. Won't you
drink some wine? I don't know the brand, but it's sweet and heavy, the master does me
proud.
 Not just now, I'm too restless. Later perhaps, if you can bear with me that long.
Besides, I wouldn't dare drink out of your glass. Who is the master?
 The owner of the bark. They are excellent men, these masters. Except that I
don't understand them. I don't mean their language, although of course I often don't
understand their language, either. But this is beside the point. Over the centuries I've
learned enough languages to act as interpreter between this generation and their
ancestors. What I don't understand is the way the masters' minds work. Perhaps you
can explain it to me.
 I haven't much hope. How could I explain anything to you, compared with
whom I am but a babbling babe?
 Don't, don't talk like that. You'd do me a favor if you'd be a little more manly,
$ 262
more self-assured. What am I to do with a mere shadow of a guest? I'll blow him
through the porthole into the lake. I need several explanations. You who roam around
outside can give me them. But if you sit trembling at my table here and by selfdeception forget the little you know, then you may as well clear out at once. What I
mean, I say.
 There's something in that. In fact, I am superior to you in some ways. So I'll try
to control myself. Ask away!
 Better, far better that you exaggerate in this direction and that you fancy
yourself to be somehow superior. But you must understand me properly. I am a
human being like you, I'm as many centuries more impatient as I am older than you.
Well, let's talk about the masters. Listen! And drink some wine, to sharpen your wits.
Don't be shy. Take a good swig. There's another large shipload there.
 Gracchus, that's an excellent wine. Long live the master!
 Pity that he died today. He was a good man and he went peacefully. Healthy,
grown-up children stood at his deathbed, his wife had fainted at the foot, but his last
thought was for me. A good man, a Hamburger.
 Heavens above, a Hamburger! And you down here in the south know that he
died today?
 What? I not know when my master dies? You're really a bit simple-minded.
 Are you trying to insult me?
 Not at all, I do it without meaning to. But you shouldn't be so surprised. Drink
more wine. As for the masters, it's like this: originally, the bark belonged to no one.
$ 263
 Gracchus, one request. First, tell me briefly but coherently how things are with
you. To be truthful: I really don't know. You of course take these things for granted
and assume, as is your way, that the whole world knows about them. But in this brief
human life -- and life really is brief, Gracchus, try to grasp that -- in this brief life it's as
much as one can do to get oneself and one's family through. Interesting as the Hunter
Gracchus is -- this is conviction, not flattery -- there's no time to think of him, to find
out about him, let alone worry about him. Perhaps on one's deathbed, like your
Hamburger, this I don't know. Perhaps the busy man will then have a chance to stretch
out for the first time and let the green Hunter Gracchus pass for once through his idle
thoughts. But otherwise, it's as I've said: I knew nothing about you, business brought
me down here to the harbor, I saw the bark, the gangplank lay ready, I walked across --
but now I'd like to know something coherent about you.
 Ah, coherent. That old, old story. All the books are full of it, teachers draw it on
the blackboard in every school, the mother dreams of it while suckling her child, lovers
murmur it while embracing, merchants tell it to the customers, the customers to the
merchants, soldiers sing it on the march, preachers declaim it in church, historians in
their studies realize with open mouths what happened long ago and never cease
describing it, it is printed in the newspapers and people pass it from hand to hand, the
telegraph was invented so that it might encircle the world the faster, it is excavated
from ruined cities, and the elevator rushes it up to the top of the skyscraper. Railway
passengers announce it from the windows to the countries they are passing through,
but even before that the savages have howled it at them, it can be read in the stars and
the lakes reflect it, the streams bring it down from the mountains and the snow
scatters it again on the summit, and you, man, sit here and ask me for coherence. You
must have had an exceptionally dissipated youth.
 Possibly, as is typical of any youth. But it would be very useful, I think, if you
would go and have a good look around the world. Strange as it may seem to you, and
sitting here it surprises even me, it's a fact that you are not the talk of the town,
$ 264
however many subjects may be discussed you are not among them, the world goes its
way and you go on your journey, but until today I have never noticed that your paths
have crossed.
 These are your observations, my dear friend, other people have made others.
There are only two possibilities here. Either you conceal what you know about me, and
do so with a definite motive. In which case let me tell you frankly: you are on the
wrong track. Or you actually think that you can't remember me, because you confuse
my story with someone else's. In that case I can only tell you: I am -- no, I can't,
everyone knows it and of all people I should be the one to tell you! It's so long ago. Ask
the historians! Go to them, and then come back. It's so long ago. How can I be
expected to keep it in this overcrowded brain?
 Wait, Gracchus, I'll make it easier for you, I'll ask you some questions. Where
do you come from?
 From the Black Forest, as everyone knows.
 From the Black Forest, of course. And was it there, around about the fourth
century, that you used to hunt?
 Man alive, do you know the Black Forest?
 No.
 You really don't know anything. The helmsman's little child knows more than
you, probably far more. Who on earth sent you in here? It's fate. Your obtrusive
modesty was indeed only too well justified. You are a nonentity whom I'm filling up
with wine. Now you don't even know the Black Forest. And I was born there. I hunted
there until I was twenty-five. If only the chamois had not led me astray -- well, now
you know it -- I'd have had a long pleasant hunter's life, but the chamois led me on, I
$ 265
fell down a precipice and was killed on the rocks. Don't ask any more. Here I am, dead,
dead, dead. Don't know why I'm here. Was loaded onto the death ship, as befits a
miserable dead man, the three or four ministrations were performed upon me, as on
everyone, why should they make an exception of the Hunter Gracchus? Everything
was in order, I lay stretched out in the boat.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
The Great Wall of China
 THE GREAT WALL OF CHINA was finished off at its northernmost corner. From
the southeast and the southwest it came up in two sections that finally converged
there. This principle of piecemeal construction was also applied on a smaller scale by
both of the two great armies of labor, the eastern and the western. It was done in this
way: gangs of some twenty workers were formed who had to accomplish a length, say,
of five hundred yards of wall, while a similar gang built another stretch of the same
length to meet the first. But after the junction had been made the construction of the
$ 266
wall was not carried on from the point, let us say, where this thousand yards ended;
instead the two groups of workers were transferred to begin building again in quite
different neighborhoods. Naturally in this way many great gaps were left, which were
only filled in gradually and bit by bit, some, indeed, not till after the official
announcement that the wall was finished. In fact it is said that there are gaps which
have never been filled in at all, an assertion, however, that is probably merely one of
the many legends to which the building of the wall gave rise, and which cannot be
verified, at least by any single man with his own eyes and judgment, on account of the
extent of the structure.
 Now on first thoughts one might conceive that it would have been more
advantageous in every way to build the wall continuously, or at least continuously
within the two main divisions. After all, the wall was intended, as was universally
proclaimed and known, to be a protection against the peoples of the north. But how
can a wall protect if it is not a continuous structure? Not only can such a wall not
protect, but what there is of it is in perpetual danger. These blocks of wall left standing
in deserted regions could be easily pulled down again and again by the nomads,
especially as these tribes, rendered apprehensive by the building operations, kept
changing their encampments with incredible rapidity, like locusts, and so perhaps had
a better general view of the progress of the wall than we, the builders. Nevertheless the
task of construction probably could not have been carried out in any other way. To
understand this we must take into account the following: the wall was to be a
protection for centuries; accordingly, the most scrupulous care in the building, the
application of the architectural wisdom of all known ages and peoples, an unremitting
sense of personal responsibility in the builders were indispensable prerequisites for the
work. True, for the more purely manual tasks ignorant day laborers from the populace,
men, women, and children who offered their services for good money, could be
employed; but for the supervision even of every four day laborers an expert versed in
the art of building was required, a man who was capable of entering into and feeling
with all his heart what was involved. And the higher the task, the greater the
$ 267
responsibility. And such men were actually to be had, if not indeed so abundantly as
the work of construction could have absorbed, yet in great numbers.
 For the work had not been undertaken without thought. Fifty years before the
first stone was laid, the art of architecture, and especially that of masonry, had been
proclaimed as the most important branch of knowledge throughout the whole area of
a China that was to be walled around, and all other arts gained recognition only
insofar as they had reference to it. I can still remember quite well us standing as small
children, scarcely sure on our feet, in our teacher's garden, and being ordered to build
a sort of wall out of pebbles; and then the teacher, girding up his robe, ran full tilt
against the wall, of course knocking it down, and scolded us so terribly for the
shoddiness of our work that we ran weeping in all directions to our parents. A trivial
incident, but significant of the spirit of the time.
 I was lucky inasmuch as the building of the wall was just beginning when, at
twenty, I had passed the last examination of the lowest school. I say lucky, for many
who before my time had achieved the highest degree of culture available to them could
find nothing year after year to do with their knowledge, and drifted uselessly about
with the most splendid architectural plans in their heads, and sank by thousands into
hopelessness. But those who finally came to be employed in the work as supervisors,
even though it might be of the lowest rank, were truly worthy of their task. They were
masons who had reflected much, and did not cease to reflect, on the building of the
wall, men who with the first stone they sank in the ground felt themselves a part of the
wall. Masons of that kind, of course, had not only a desire to perform their work in the
most thorough manner, but were also impatient to see the wall finished in its complete
perfection. Day laborers have not this impatience, for they look only to their wages,
and the higher supervisors, indeed even the supervisors of middle rank, could see
enough of the manifold growth of the construction to keep their spirits confident and
high. But to encourage the subordinate supervisors, intellectually so vastly superior to
their apparently petty tasks, other measures must be taken. One could not, for
$ 268
instance, expect them to lay one stone on another for months or even years on end, in
an uninhabited mountainous region, hundreds of miles from their homes; the
hopelessness of such hard toil, which yet could not reach completion even in the
longest lifetime, would have cast them into despair and above all made them less
capable for the work. It was for this reason that the system of piecemeal building was
decided on. Five hundred yards could be accomplished in about five years; by that
time, however, the supervisors were as a rule quite exhausted and had lost all faith in
themselves, in the wall, in the world. Accordingly, while they were still exalted by the
jubilant celebrations marking the completion of the thousand yards of wall, they were
sent far, far away, saw on their journey finished sections of the wall rising here and
there, came past the quarters of the high command and were presented with badges of
honor, heard the rejoicings of new armies of labor streaming past from the depths of
the land, saw forests being cut down to become supports for the wall, saw mountains
being hewn into stones for the wall, heard at the holy shrines hymns rising in which
the pious prayed for the completion of the wall. All this assuaged their impatience.
The quiet life of their homes, where they rested some time, strengthened them; the
humble credulity with which their reports were listened to, the confidence with which
the simple and peaceful burgher believed in the eventual completion of the wall, all
this filled their hearts with a new buoyancy. Like eternally hopeful children they then
said farewell to their homes; the desire once more to labor on the wall of the nation
became irresistible. They set off earlier than they needed; half the village accompanied
them for long distances. Groups of people with banners and streamers waving were on
all the roads; never before had they seen how great and rich and beautiful and worthy
of love their country was. Every fellow countryman was a brother for whom one was
building a wall of protection, and who would return lifelong thanks for it with all he
had and did. Unity! Unity! Shoulder to shoulder, a ring of brothers, a current of blood
no longer confined within the narrow circulation of one body, but sweetly rolling and
yet ever returning throughout the endless leagues of China.
 Thus, then, the system of piecemeal construction becomes comprehensible;
$ 269
but there were still other reasons for it as well. Nor is there anything odd in my
pausing over this question for so long; it is one of the crucial problems in the whole
building of the wall, unimportant as it may appear at first glance. If I am to convey and
make understandable the ideas and feelings of that time I cannot go deeply enough
into this very question.
 First, then, it must be said that in those days things were achieved scarcely
inferior to the construction of the Tower of Babel, although as regards divine approval,
at least according to human reckoning, strongly at variance with that work. I say this
because during the early days of building a scholar wrote a book in which he drew the
comparison in the most exhaustive way. In it he tried to prove that the Tower of Babel
failed to reach its goal, not because of the reasons universally advanced, or at least that
among those recognized reasons the most important of all was not to be found. His
proofs were drawn not merely from written documents and reports; he also claimed to
have made inquiries on the spot, and to have discovered that the tower failed and was
bound to fail because of the weakness of the foundation. In this respect at any rate our
age was vastly superior to that ancient one. Almost every educated man of our time
was a mason by profession and infallible in the matter of laying foundations. That,
however, was not what our scholar was concerned to prove; for he maintained that the
Great Wall alone would provide for the first time in the history of mankind a secure
foundation for a new Tower of Babel. First the wall, therefore, and then the tower. His
book was in everybody's hands at that time, but I admit that even today I cannot quite
make out how he conceived this tower. How could the wall, which did not form even a
circle, but only a sort of quarter- or half-circle, provide the foundation for a tower?
That could obviously be meant only in a spiritual sense. But in that case why build the
actual wall, which after all was something concrete, the result of the lifelong labor of
multitudes of people? And why were there in the book plans, somewhat nebulous
plans, it must be admitted, of the tower, and proposals worked out in detail for
mobilizing the people's energies for the stupendous new work?
$ 270
 There were many wild ideas in people's heads at that time -- this scholar's book
is only one example -- perhaps simply because so many were trying to join forces as far
as they could for the achievement of a single aim. Human nature, essentially
changeable, unstable as the dust, can endure no restraint; if it binds itself it soon
begins to tear madly at its bonds, until it rends everything asunder, the wall, the bonds,
and its very self.
 It is possible that these very considerations, which militated against the
building of the wall at all, were not left out of account by the high command when the
system of piecemeal construction was decided on. We -- and here I speak in the name
of many people -- did not really know ourselves until we had carefully scrutinized the
decrees of the high command, when we discovered that without the high command
neither our book learning nor our human understanding would have sufficed for the
humble tasks which we performed in the great whole. In the office of the command --
where it was and who sat there no one whom I have asked knew then or knows now --
in that office one may be certain that all human thoughts and desires revolved in a
circle, and all human aims and fulfillments in a countercircle. And through the
window the reflected splendors of divine worlds fell on the hands of the leaders as they
traced their plans.
 And for that reason the incorruptible observer must hold that the command, if
it had seriously desired it, could also have overcome those difficulties that prevented a
system of continuous construction. There remains, therefore, nothing but the
conclusion that the command deliberately chose the system of piecemeal
construction. But the piecemeal construction was only a makeshift and therefore
inexpedient. Remains the conclusion that the command willed something inexpedient.
Strange conclusion! True, and yet in one respect it has much to be said for it. One can
perhaps safely discuss it now. In those days many people, and among them the best,
had a secret maxim which ran: Try with all your might to comprehend the decrees of
the high command, but only up to a certain point; then avoid further meditation. A
$ 271
very wise maxim, which moreover was elaborated in a parable that was later often
quoted: Avoid further meditation, but not because it might be harmful; it is not at all
certain that it would be harmful. What is harmful or not harmful has nothing to do
with the question. Consider rather the river in spring. It rises until it grows mightier
and nourishes more richly the soil on the long stretch of its banks, still maintaining its
own course until it reaches the sea, where it is all the more welcome because it is a
worthier ally. Thus far may you urge your meditations on the decrees of the high
command. But after that the river overflows its banks, loses outline and shape, slows
down the speed of its current, tries to ignore its destiny by forming little seas in the
interior of the land, damages the fields, and yet cannot maintain itself for long in its
new expanse, but must run back between its banks again, must even dry up wretchedly
in the hot season that presently follows. Thus far may you not urge your meditations
on the decrees of the high command.
 Now though this parable may have had extraordinary point and force during
the building of the wall, it has at most only a restricted relevance for my present essay.
My inquiry is purely historical; no lightning flashes any longer from the long since
vanished thunderclouds, and so I may venture to seek for an explanation of the system
of piecemeal construction which goes farther than the one that contented people then.
The limits that my capacity for thought imposes upon me are narrow enough, but the
province to be traversed here is infinite.
 Against whom was the Great Wall to serve as a protection? Against the people
of the north. Now, I come from the southeast of China. No northern people can
menace us there. We read of them in the books of the ancients; the cruelties they
commit in accordance with their nature make us sigh in our peaceful arbors. The
faithful representations of the artist show us these faces of the damned, their gaping
mouths, their jaws furnished with great pointed teeth, their half-shut eyes that already
seem to be seeking out the victim which their jaws will rend and devour. When our
children are unruly we show them these pictures, and at once they fly weeping into
$ 272
our arms. But nothing more than that do we know about these northerners. We have
not seen them, and if we remain in our villages we shall never see them, even if on
their wild horses they should ride as hard as they can straight toward us -- the land is
too vast and would not let them reach us, they would end their course in the empty
air.
 Why, then, since that is so, did we leave our homes, the stream with its bridges,
our mothers and fathers, our weeping wives, our children who needed our care, and
depart for the distant city to be trained there, while our thoughts journeyed still
farther away to the wall in the north? Why? A question for the high command. Our
leaders know us. They, absorbed in gigantic anxieties, know of us, know our petty
pursuits, see us sitting together in our humble huts, and approve or disapprove the
evening prayer which the father of the house recites in the midst of his family. And if I
may be allowed to express such ideas about the high command, then I must say that in
my opinion the high command has existed from old time, and was not assembled, say,
like a gathering of mandarins summoned hastily to discuss somebody's fine dream in a
conference as hastily terminated, so that that very evening the people are drummed
out of their beds to carry out what has been decided, even if it should be nothing but
an illumination in honor of a god who may have shown great favor to their masters the
day before, only to drive them into some dark corner with cudgel blows tomorrow,
almost before the illuminations have died down. Far rather do I believe that the high
command has existed from all eternity, and the decision to build the wall likewise.
Unwitting peoples of the north, who imagined they were the cause of it! Honest,
unwitting Emperor, who imagined he decreed it! We builders of the wall know that it
was not so and hold our tongues.
 During the building of the wall and ever since to this very day I have occupied
myself almost exclusively with the comparative history of races -- there are certain
questions that one can probe to the marrow, as it were, only by this method -- and I
have discovered that we Chinese possess certain folk and political institutions that are
$ 273
unique in their clarity, others again unique in their obscurity. The desire to trace the
cause of these phenomena, especially the latter, has always intrigued me and intrigues
me still, and the building of the wall is itself essentially involved with these problems.
 Now one of the most obscure of our institutions is that of the empire itself. In
Peking, naturally, at the imperial court, there is some clarity to be found on this
subject, though even that is more illusive than real. Also the teachers of political law
and history in the schools of higher learning claim to be exactly informed on these
matters, and to be capable of passing on their knowledge to their students. The farther
one descends among the lower schools the more, naturally enough, does one find
teachers' and pupils' doubts of their own knowledge vanishing, and superficial culture
mounting sky-high around a few precepts that have been drilled into people's minds
for centuries, precepts which, though they have lost nothing of their eternal truth,
remain eternally invisible in this fog of confusion.
 But it is precisely this question of the empire which in my opinion the common
people should be asked to answer, since after all they are the empire's final support.
Here, I must confess, I can only speak once more for my native place. Except for the
nature gods, and their ritual which fills the whole year in such beautiful and rich
alternation, we think only about the Emperor. But not about the present one; or rather
we would think about the present one if we knew who he was or knew anything
definite about him. True -- and it is the sole curiosity that fills us -- we are always
trying to get information on this subject, but, strange as it may sound, it is almost
impossible to discover anything, either from pilgrims, though they have wandered
through much of our land, or from near or distant villages, or from sailors, though
they have navigated not only our little stream, but also the sacred rivers. One hears a
great many things, true, but can gather nothing definite.
 So vast is our land that no fable could do justice to its vastness, the heavens can
scarcely span it -- and Peking is only a dot in it, and the imperial palace less than a dot.
$ 274
The Emperor as such, on the other hand, is mighty throughout all the hierarchies of
the world: admitted. But the existent Emperor, a man like us, lies much like us on a
couch which is of generous proportions, perhaps, and yet very possibly may be quite
narrow and short. Like us he sometimes stretches himself and when he is very tired
yawns with his delicately cut mouth. But how should we know anything about that --
thousands of miles away in the south -- almost on the borders of the Tibetan
Highlands? And besides, any tidings, even if they did reach us, would arrive far too
late, would have become obsolete long before they reached us. The Emperor is always
surrounded by a brilliant and yet ambiguous throng of nobles and courtiers -- malice
and enmity in the guise of servants and friends -- who form a counterweight to the
imperial power and perpetually labor to unseat the ruler from his place with poisoned
arrows. The Empire is immortal, but the Emperor himself totters and falls from his
throne, yes, whole dynasties sink in the end and breathe their last in one death rattle.
Of these struggles and sufferings the people will never know; like tardy arrivals, like
strangers in a city, they stand at the end of some densely thronged side street
peacefully munching the food they have brought with them, while far away in front, in
the Market Square at the heart of the city, the execution of their ruler is proceeding.
 There is a parable that describes this situation very well: The Emperor, so it
runs, has sent a message to you, the humble subject, the insignificant shadow cowering
in the remotest distance before the imperial sun; the Emperor from his deathbed has
sent a message to you alone. He has commanded the messenger to kneel down by the
bed, and has whispered the message to him; so much store did he lay on it that he
ordered the messenger to whisper it back into his ear again. Then by a nod of the head
he has confirmed that it is right. Yes, before the assembled spectators of his death -- all
the obstructing walls have been broken down, and on the spacious and loftily
mounting open staircases stand in a ring the great princes of the Empire -- before all
these he has delivered his message. The messenger immediately sets out on his
journey; a powerful, an indefatigable man; now pushing with his right arm, now with
his left, he cleaves a way for himself through the throng; if he encounters resistance he
$ 275
points to his breast, where the symbol of the sun glitters; the way is made easier for
him than it would be for any other man. But the multitudes are so vast; their numbers
have no end. If he could reach the open fields how fast he would fly, and soon
doubtless you would hear the welcome hammering of his fists on your door. But
instead how vainly does he wear out his strength; still he is only making his way
through the chambers of the innermost palace; never will he get to the end of them;
and if he succeeded in that nothing would be gained; he must next fight his way down
the stair; and if he succeeded in that nothing would be gained; the courts would still
have to be crossed; and after the courts the second outer palace; and once more stairs
and courts; and once more another palace; and so on for thousands of years; and if at
last he should burst through the outermost gate -- but never, never can that happen --
the imperial capital would lie before him, the center of the world, crammed to
bursting with its own sediment. Nobody could fight his way through here even with a
message from a dead man. But you sit at your window when evening falls and dream it
to yourself.
 Just so, as hopelessly and as hopefully, do our people regard the Emperor. They
do not know what Emperor is reigning, and there exist doubts regarding even the
name of the dynasty. In school a great deal is taught about the dynasties with the dates
of succession, but the universal uncertainty in this matter is so great that even the best
scholars are drawn into it. Long-dead emperors are set on the throne in our villages,
and one that only lives on in song recently had a proclamation of his read out by the
priest before the altar. Battles that are old history are new to us, and one's neighbor
rushes in with a jubilant face to tell the news. The wives of the emperors, pampered
and overweening, seduced from noble custom by wily courtiers, swelling with
ambition, vehement in their greed, uncontrollable in their lust, practice their
abominations ever anew. The more deeply they are buried in time the more glaring are
the colors in which their deeds are painted, and with a loud cry of woe our village
eventually hears how an Empress drank her husband's blood in long draughts
thousands of years ago.
$ 276
 Thus, then, do our people deal with departed emperors, but the living ruler
they confuse among the dead. If once, only once in a man's lifetime, an imperial
official on his tour of the provinces should arrive by chance at our village, make
certain announcements in the name of the government, scrutinize the tax lists,
examine the school children, inquire of the priest regarding our doings and affairs, and
then, before he steps into his sedan chair, should sum up his impressions in verbose
admonitions to the assembled commune -- then a smile flits over every face, people
throw surreptitious glances at each other, and bend over their children so as not to be
observed by the official. Why, they think to themselves, he's speaking of a dead man as
if he were alive, this Emperor of his died long ago, the dynasty is blotted out, the good
official is having his joke with us, but we will behave as if we did not notice it, so as not
to offend him. But we shall obey in earnest no one but our present ruler, for not to do
so would be a crime. And behind the departing sedan chair of the official there rises in
might as ruler of the village some figure fortuitously exalted from an urn already
crumbled to dust.
 Similarly our people are but little affected by revolutions in the state or
contemporary wars. I recall an incident in my youth. A revolt had broken out in a
neighboring, but yet quite distant, province. What caused it I can no longer remember,
nor is it of any importance now; occasions for revolt can be found there any day, the
people are an excitable people. Well, one day a leaflet published by the rebels was
brought to my father's house by a beggar who had crossed that province. It happened
to be a feast day, our rooms were filled with guests, the priest sat in the center and
studied the sheet. Suddenly everybody started to laugh, in the confusion the sheet was
torn, the beggar, who however had already received abundant alms, was driven out of
the room with blows, the guests dispersed to enjoy the beautiful day. Why? The dialect
of this neighboring province differs in some essential respects from ours, and this
difference occurs also in certain turns of the written word, which for us have an
archaic character. Hardly had the priest read two pages before we had come to our
decision. Ancient history told long ago, old sorrows long since healed. And though --
$ 277
so it seems to me in recollection -- the gruesomeness of the living present was
irrefutably conveyed by the beggar's words, we laughed and shook our heads and
refused to listen any longer. So eager are our people to obliterate the present.
 If from such appearances anyone should draw the conclusion that in reality we
have no Emperor, he would not be far from the truth. Over and over again it must be
repeated: There is perhaps no people more faithful to the Emperor than ours in the
south, but the Emperor derives no advantage from our fidelity. True, the sacred
dragon stands on the little column at the end of our village, and ever since the
beginning of human memory it has breathed out its fiery breath in the direction of
Peking in token of homage -- but Peking itself is far stranger to the people in our
village than the next world. Can there really be a village where the houses stand side by
side, covering all the fields for a greater distance than one can see from our hills, and
can there be dense crowds of people packed between these houses day and night? We
find it more difficult to picture such a city than to believe that Peking and its Emperor
are one, a cloud, say, peacefully voyaging beneath the sun in the course of the ages.
 Now the result of holding such opinions is a life on the whole free and
unconstrained. By no means immoral, however; hardly ever have I found in my travels
such pure morals as in my native village. But yet a life that is subject to no
contemporary law, and attends only to the exhortations and warnings that come to us
from olden times.
 I guard against generalizations, and do not assert that in all the ten thousand
villages in my province it is so, far less in all the five hundred provinces of China. Yet
perhaps I may venture to assert on the basis of the many writings on this subject
which I have read, as well as from my own observation -- the building of the wall in
particular, with its abundance of human material, provided a man of sensibility with
the opportunity of traversing the souls of almost all the provinces -- on the basis of all
this, then, perhaps I may venture to assert that the prevailing attitude to the Emperor
$ 278
shows persistently and universally something fundamentally in common with that of
our village. Now I have no wish whatever to represent this attitude as a virtue; on the
contrary. True, the essential responsibility for it lies with the government, which in the
most ancient empire in the world has not yet succeeded in developing, or has
neglected to develop, the institution of the empire to such precision that its workings
extend directly and unceasingly to the farthest frontiers of the land. On the other
hand, however, there is also involved a certain feebleness of faith and imaginative
power on the part of the people, that prevents them from raising the empire out of its
stagnation in Peking and clasping it in all its palpable living reality to their own
breasts, which yet desire nothing better than but once to feel that touch and then to
die.
 This attitude then is certainly no virtue. All the more remarkable is it that this
very weakness should seem to be one of the greatest unifying influences among our
people; indeed, if one may dare to use the expression, the very ground on which we
live. To set about establishing a fundamental defect here would mean undermining
not only our consciences, but, what is far worse, our feet. And for that reason I shall
not proceed any further at this stage with my inquiry into these questions.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 279
The News of the Building of the Wall: A Fragment
 THE NEWS of the building of the wall now penetrated into this world -- late, too,
some thirty years after its announcement. It was on a summer evening. I, ten years old,
was standing with my father on the riverbank. In keeping with the importance of this
much-discussed hour, I can recall the smallest details. My father was holding me by
the hand, something he was fond of doing to the end of his days, and running his other
hand up and down his long, very thin pipe, as though it were a flute. With his sparse,
rigid beard raised in the air, he was enjoying his pipe while gazing upwards across the
river. As a result his pigtail, object of the children's veneration, sank lower, rustling
faintly on the gold-embroidered silk of his holiday gown. At that moment a bark drew
up before us, the boatman beckoned to my father to come down the embankment,
while he himself climbed up toward him. They met halfway, the boatman whispered
something in my father's ear, in order to come quite close he had embraced him. I
could not understand what they said, I only saw that my father did not seem to believe
the news, that the boatman tried to insist upon its truth, that when my father still
refused to believe it the boatman, with the passion of sailors, almost tore the garment
from his chest to prove the truth, whereupon my father fell silent and the boatman
jumped noisily into the bark and sailed away. Deep in thought my father turned
toward me, knocked his pipe out and stuck it in his belt, stroked my cheek, and pulled
my head toward him. That is what I liked best, it made me very happy, and so we came
home. There the rice pap was already steaming on the table, several guests had
assembled, the wine, was just being poured into the goblets. Paying no attention to any
of this and having advanced no farther than the threshold, my father started telling
what he had heard. Of the exact words I have of course no recollection, but owing to
the exceptional circumstances which cast a spell even over the child, the meaning
$ 280
became so clear to me that I venture nevertheless to give some version of what my
father said. I am doing so because it was very characteristic of the popular point of
view. My father said something like this: An unknown boatman -- I know all those
who usually pass by here, but this one was a stranger -- has just told me that a great
wall is going to be built to protect the Emperor. For it seems that infidel tribes, among
them demons, often assemble before the imperial palace and shoot their black arrows
at the Emperor.
Translated by Tania and James Stern



A Report to an Academy
 HONORED MEMBERS of the Academy!
 You have done me the honor of inviting me to give your Academy an account
of the life I formerly led as an ape.
 I regret that I cannot comply with your request to the extent you desire. It is
now nearly five years since I was an ape, a short space of time, perhaps, according to
the calendar, but an infinitely long time to gallop through at full speed, as I have done,
more or less accompanied by excellent mentors, good advice, applause, and orchestral
$ 281
music, and yet essentially alone, since all my escorters, to keep the image, kept well off
the course. I could never have achieved what I have done had I been stubbornly set on
clinging to my origins, to the remembrances of my youth. In fact, to give up being
stubborn was the supreme commandment I laid upon myself; free ape as I was, I
submitted myself to that yoke. In revenge, however, my memory of the past has closed
the door against me more and more. I could have returned at first, had human beings
allowed it, through an archway as wide as the span of heaven over the earth, but as I
spurred myself on in my forced career, the opening narrowed and shrank behind me; I
felt more comfortable in the world of men and fitted it better; the strong wind that
blew after me out of my past began to slacken; today it is only a gentle puff of air that
plays around my heels; and the opening in the distance, through which it comes and
through which I once came myself, has grown so small that, even if my strength and
my will power sufficed to get me back to it, I should have to scrape the very skin from
my body to crawl through. To put it plainly, much as I like expressing myself in
images, to put it plainly: your life as apes, gentlemen, insofar as something of that kind
lies behind you, cannot be farther removed from you than mine is from me. Yet
everyone on earth feels a tickling at the heels; the small chimpanzee and the great
Achilles alike.
 But to a lesser extent I can perhaps meet your demand, and indeed I do so with
the greatest pleasure. The first thing I learned was to give a handshake; a handshake
betokens frankness; well, today, now that I stand at the very peak of my career, I hope
to add frankness in words to the frankness of that first handshake. What I have to tell
the Academy will contribute nothing essentially new, and will fall far behind what you
have asked of me and what with the best will in the world I cannot communicate --
nonetheless, it should indicate the line an erstwhile ape has had to follow in entering
and establishing himself in the world of men. Yet I could not risk putting into words
even such insignificant information as I am going to give you if I were not quite sure of
myself and if my position on all the great variety stages of the civilized world had not
become quite unassailable.
$ 282
 I belong to the Gold Coast. For the story of my capture I must depend on the
evidence of others. A hunting expedition sent out by the firm of Hagenbeck -- by the
way, I have drunk many a bottle of good red wine since then with the leader of that
expedition -- had taken up its position in the bushes by the shore when I came down
for a drink at evening among a troop of apes. They shot at us; I was the only one that
was hit; I was hit in two places.
 Once in the cheek; a slight wound; but it left a large, naked, red scar which
earned me the name of Red Peter, a horrible name, utterly inappropriate, which only
some ape could have thought of, as if the only difference between me and the
performing ape Peter, who died not so long ago and had some small local reputation,
were the red mark on my cheek. This by the way.
 The second shot hit me below the hip. It was a severe wound, it is the cause of
my limping a little to this day. I read an article recently by one of the ten thousand
windbags who vent themselves concerning me in the newspapers, saying: my ape
nature is not yet quite under control; the proof being that when visitors come to see
me, I have a predilection for taking down my trousers to show them where the shot
went in. The hand which wrote that should have its fingers shot away one by one. As
for me, I can take my trousers down before anyone if I like; you would find nothing but
a well-groomed fur and the scar made -- let me be particular in the choice of a word
for this particular purpose, to avoid misunderstanding -- the scar made by a wanton
shot. Everything is open and aboveboard; there is nothing to conceal; when the plain
truth is in question, great minds discard the niceties of refinement. But if the writer of
the article were to take down his trousers before a visitor, that would be quite another
story, and I will let it stand to his credit that he does not do it. In return, let him leave
me alone with his delicacy!
 After these two shots I came to myself -- and this is where my own memories
gradually begin -- between decks in the Hagenbeck steamer, inside a cage. It was not a
$ 283
four-sided barred cage; it was only a three-sided cage nailed to a locker; the locker
made the fourth side of it. The whole construction was too low for me to stand up in
and too narrow to sit down in. So I had to squat with my knees bent and trembling all
the time, and also, since probably for a time I wished to see no one, and to stay in the
dark, my face was turned toward the locker while the bars of the cage cut into my flesh
behind. Such a method of confining wild beasts is supposed to have its advantages
during the first days of captivity, and out of my own experiences I cannot deny that
from the human point of view this is really the case.
 But that did not occur to me then. For the first time in my life I could see no
way out; at least no direct way out; directly in front of me was the locker, board fitted
close to board. True, there was a gap running right through the boards which I greeted
with the blissful howl of ignorance when I first discovered it, but the hole was not even
wide enough to stick one's tail through and not all the strength of an ape could enlarge
it.
 I am supposed to have made uncommonly little noise, as I was later informed,
from which the conclusion was drawn that I would either soon die or if I managed to
survive the first critical period would be very amenable to training. I did survive this
period. Hopelessly sobbing, painfully hunting for fleas, apathetically licking a
cocoanut, beating my skull against the locker, sticking out my tongue at anyone who
came near me -- that was how I filled in time at first in my new life. But over and
above it all only the one feeling: no way out. Of course what I felt then as an ape I can
represent now only in human terms, and therefore I misrepresent it, but although I
cannot reach back to the truth of the old ape life, there is no doubt that it lies
somewhere in the direction I have indicated.
 Until then I had had so many ways out of everything, and now I had none. I was
pinned down. Had I been nailed down, my right to free movement would not have
been lessened. Why so? Scratch your flesh raw between your toes, but you won't find
$ 284
the answer. Press yourself against the bar behind you till it nearly cuts you in two, you
won't find the answer. I had no way out but I had to devise one, for without it I could
not live. All the time facing that locker -- I should certainly have perished. Yet as far as
Hagenbeck was concerned, the place for apes was in front of a locker -- well then, I
had to stop being an ape. A fine, clear train of thought, which I must have constructed
somehow with my belly, since apes think with their bellies.
 I fear that perhaps you do not quite understand what I mean by "way out." I use
the expression in its fullest and most popular sense. I deliberately do not use the word
"freedom." I do not mean the spacious feeling of freedom on all sides. As an ape,
perhaps, I knew that, and I have met men who yearn for it. But for my part I desired
such freedom neither then nor now. In passing: may I say that all too often men are
betrayed by the word freedom. And as freedom is counted among the most sublime
feelings, so the corresponding disillusionment can be also sublime. In variety theaters I
have often watched, before my turn came on, a couple of acrobats performing on
trapezes high in the roof. They swung themselves, they rocked to and fro, they sprang
into the air, they floated into each other's arms, one hung by the hair from the teeth of
the other. "And that too is human freedom," I thought, "self-controlled movement."
What a mockery of holy Mother Nature! Were the apes to see such a spectacle, no
theater walls could stand the shock of their laughter.
 No, freedom was not what I wanted. Only a way out; right or left, or in any
direction; I made no other demand; even should the way out prove to be an illusion;
the demand was a small one, the disappointment could be no bigger. To get out
somewhere, to get out! Only not to stay motionless with raised arms, crushed against a
wooden wall.
 Today I can see it clearly; without the most profound inward calm I could
never have found my way out. And indeed perhaps I owe all that I have become to the
calm that settled within me after my first few days in the ship. And again for that
$ 285
calmness it was the ship's crew I had to thank.
 They were good creatures, in spite of everything. I find it still pleasant to
remember the sound of their heavy footfalls which used to echo through my halfdreaming head. They had a habit of doing everything as slowly as possible. If one of
them wanted to rub his eyes, he lifted a hand as if it were a drooping weight. Their
jests were coarse, but hearty. Their laughter had always a gruff bark in it that sounded
dangerous but meant nothing. They always had something in their mouths to spit out
and did not care where they spat it. They always grumbled that they got fleas from me;
yet they were not seriously angry about it; they knew that my fur fostered fleas, and
that fleas jump; it was a simple matter of fact to them. When they were off duty some
of them often used to sit down in a semicircle around me; they hardly spoke but only
grunted to each other; smoked their pipes, stretched out on lockers; smacked their
knees as soon as I made the slightest movement; and now and then one of them would
take a stick and tickle me where I liked being tickled. If I were to be invited today to
take a cruise on that ship I should certainly refuse the invitation, but just as certainly
the memories I could recall between its decks would not all be hateful.
 The calmness I acquired among these people kept me above all from trying to
escape. As I look back now, it seems to me I must have had at least an inkling that I
had to find a way out or die, but that my way out could not be reached through flight. I
cannot tell now whether escape was possible, but I believe it must have been; for an
ape it must always be possible. With my teeth as they are today I have to be careful
even in simply cracking nuts, but at that time I could certainly have managed by
degrees to bite through the lock of my cage. I did not do it. What good would it have
done me? As soon as I had poked out my head I should have been caught again and
put in a worse cage; or I might have slipped among the other animals without being
noticed, among the pythons, say, who were opposite me, and so breathed out my life
in their embrace; or supposing I had actually succeeded in sneaking out as far as the
deck and leaping overboard, I should have rocked for a little on the deep sea and then
$ 286
been drowned. Desperate remedies. I did not think it out in this human way, but under
the influence of my surroundings I acted as if I had thought it out.
 I did not think things out; but I observed everything quietly. I watched these
men go to and fro, always the same faces, the same movements, often it seemed to me
there was only the same man. So this man or these men walked about unimpeded. A
lofty goal faintly dawned before me. No one promised me that if I became like them
the bars of my cage would be taken away. Such promises for apparently impossible
contingencies are not given. But if one achieves the impossible, the promises appear
later retrospectively precisely where one had looked in vain for them before. Now,
these men in themselves had no great attraction for me. Had I been devoted to the
aforementioned idea of freedom, I should certainly have preferred the deep sea to the
way out that suggested itself in the heavy faces of these men. At any rate, I watched
them for a long time before I even thought of such things, indeed, it was only the mass
weight of my observations that impelled me in the right direction.
 It was so easy to imitate these people. I learned to spit in the very first days. We
used to spit in each other's faces; the only difference was that I licked my face clean
afterwards and they did not. I could soon smoke a pipe like an old hand; and if I also
pressed my thumb into the bowl of the pipe, a roar of appreciation went up betweendecks; only it took me a very long time to understand the difference between a full
pipe and an empty one.
 My worst trouble came from the schnapps bottle. The smell of it revolted me; I
forced myself to it as best I could; but it took weeks for me to master my repulsion.
This inward conflict, strangely enough, was taken more seriously by the crew than
anything else about me. I cannot distinguish the men from each other in my
recollection, but there was one of them who came again and again, alone or with
friends, by day, by night, at all kinds of hours; he would post himself before me with
the bottle and give me instructions. He could not understand me, he wanted to solve
$ 287
the enigma of my being. He would slowly uncork the bottle and then look at me to see
if I had followed him; I admit that I always watched him with wildly eager, too eager
attention; such a student of humankind no human teacher ever found on earth. After
the bottle was uncorked he lifted it to his mouth; I followed it with my eyes right up to
his jaws; he would nod, pleased with me, and set the bottle to his lips; I, enchanted
with my gradual enlightenment, squealed and scratched myself comprehensively
wherever scratching was called for; he rejoiced, tilted the bottle, and took a drink; I,
impatient and desperate to emulate him, befouled myself in my cage, which again gave
him great satisfaction; and then, holding the bottle at arm's length and bringing it up
with a swing, he would empty it at one draught, leaning back at an exaggerated angle
for my better instruction. I, exhausted by too much effort, could follow him no farther
and hung limply to the bars, while he ended his theoretical exposition by rubbing his
belly and grinning.
 After theory came practice. Was I not already quite exhausted by my
theoretical instruction? Indeed I was; utterly exhausted. That was part of my destiny.
And yet I would take hold of the proffered bottle as well as I was able; uncork it,
trembling; this successful action would gradually inspire me with new energy; I would
lift the bottle, already following my original model almost exactly; put it to my lips and
-- and then throw it down in disgust, utter disgust, although it was empty and filled
only with the smell of the spirit, throw it down on the floor in disgust. To the sorrow
of my teacher, to the greater sorrow of myself; neither of us being really comforted by
the fact that I did not forget, even though I had thrown away the bottle, to rub my
belly most admirably and to grin.
 Far too often my lesson ended in that way. And to the credit of my teacher, he
was not angry; sometimes indeed he would hold his burning pipe against my fur, until
it began to smolder in some place I could not easily reach, but then he would himself
extinguish it with his own kind, enormous hand; he was not angry with me, he
perceived that we were both fighting on the same side against the nature of apes and
$ 288
that I had the more difficult task.
 What a triumph it was then both for him and for me, when one evening before
a large circle of spectators -- perhaps there was a celebration of some kind, a
gramophone was playing, an officer was circulating among the crew -- when on this
evening, just as no one was looking, I took hold of a schnapps bottle that had been
carelessly left standing before my cage, uncorked it in the best style, while the
company began to watch me with mounting attention, set it to my lips without
hesitation, with no grimace, like a professional drinker, with rolling eyes and full
throat, actually and truly drank it empty; then threw the bottle away, not this time in
despair but as an artistic performer; forgot, indeed, to rub my belly; but instead of that,
because I could not help it, because my senses were reeling, called a brief and
unmistakable "Hallo!" breaking into human speech, and with this outburst broke into
the human community, and felt its echo: "Listen, he's talking!" like a caress over the
whole of my sweat-drenched body.
 I repeat: there was no attraction for me in imitating human beings; I imitated
them because I needed a way out, and for no other reason. And even that triumph of
mine did not achieve much. I lost my human voice again at once; it did not come back
for months; my aversion for the schnapps bottle returned again with even greater
force. But the line I was to follow had in any case been decided, once for all.
 When I was handed over to my first trainer in Hamburg I soon realized that
there were two alternatives before me: the Zoological Gardens or the variety stage. I
did not hesitate. I said to myself: do your utmost to get onto the variety stage; the
Zoological Gardens means only a new cage; once there, you are done for.
 And so I learned things, gentlemen. Ah, one learns when one has to; one learns
when one needs a way out; one learns at all costs. One stands over oneself with a whip;
one flays oneself at the slightest opposition. My ape nature fled out of me, head over
heels and away, so that my first teacher was almost himself turned into an ape by it,
$ 289
had soon to give up teaching and was taken away to a mental hospital. Fortunately he
was soon let out again.
 But I used up many teachers, indeed, several teachers at once. As I became
more confident of my abilities, as the public took an interest in my progress and my
future began to look bright, I engaged teachers for myself, established them in five
communicating rooms, and took lessons from them all at once by dint of leaping from
one room to the other.
 That progress of mine! How the rays of knowledge penetrated from all sides
into my awakening brain! I do not deny it: I found it exhilarating. But I must also
confess: I did not overestimate it, not even then, much less now. With an effort which
up till now has never been repeated I managed to reach the cultural level of an average
European. In itself that might be nothing to speak of, but it is something insofar as it
has helped me out of my cage and opened a special way out for me, the way of
humanity. There is an excellent idiom: to fight one's way through the thick of things;
that is what I have done, I have fought through the thick of things. There was nothing
else for me to do, provided always that freedom was not to be my choice.
 As I look back over my development and survey what I have achieved so far, I
do not complain, but I am not complacent either. With my hands in my trouser
pockets, my bottle of wine on the table, I half lie and half sit in my rocking chair and
gaze out of the window: if a visitor arrives, I receive him with propriety. My manager
sits in the anteroom; when I ring, he comes and listens to what I have to say. Nearly
every evening I give a performance, and I have a success that could hardly be
increased. When I come home late at night from banquets, from scientific receptions,
from social gatherings, there sits waiting for me a half-trained little chimpanzee and I
take comfort from her as apes do. By day I cannot bear to see her; for she has the
insane look of the bewildered half-broken animal in her eye; no one else sees it, but I
do, and I cannot bear it. On the whole, at any rate, I have achieved what I set out to
$ 290
achieve. But do not tell me that it was not worth the trouble. In any case, I am not
appealing for any man's verdict, I am only imparting knowledge, I am only making a
report. To you also, honored Members of the Academy, I have only made a report.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
A Report to an Academy: Two Fragments
 WE ALL KNOW Rotpeter, just as half the world knows him. But when he came to
our town for a guest performance, I decided to get to know him personally. It is not
difficult to be admitted. In big cities where everyone in the know clamors to watch
celebrities breathe from as close as possible, great difficulties may be encountered; but
in our town one is content to marvel at the marvelous from the pit. Thus I was the
only one so far, as the hotel servant told me, to have announced his visit. Herr
Busenau, the impresario, received me with extreme courtesy. I had not expected to
meet a man so modest, indeed almost timid. He was sitting in the anteroom of
Rotpeter's apartment, eating an omelet. Although it was morning he already sat there
$ 291
in the evening clothes in which he appears at the performances. Hardly had he caught
sight of me -- me the unknown, the unimportant guest -- when he, possessor of highly
distinguished medals, king of trainers, honorary doctor of great universities, jumped
up, shook me by both hands, urged me to sit down, wiped his spoon on the tablecloth,
and amiably offered it to me so that I might finish his omelet. He would not accept my
grateful refusal and promptly tried to feed me. I had some trouble calming him down
and warding him off, as well as his spoon and plate.
 "Very kind of you to have come," he said with a strong foreign accent. "Most
kind. You've also come at the right time, for alas Rotpeter cannot always receive.
Seeing people is often repugnant to him; on these occasions no one, it does not matter
who he may be, is admitted; then I, even I can see him only on business, so to speak,
on the stage. And immediately after the performance I have to disappear, he drives
home alone, locks himself in his room, and usually remains like that until the
following evening. He always has a big hamper of fruit in his bedroom, this is what he
lives on at these times. But I, who of course dare not let him out of my sight, always
rent the apartment opposite his and watch him from behind curtains."
 When I sit opposite you like this, Rotpeter, listening to you talk, drinking your
health, I really and truly forget -- whether you take it as a compliment or not, it's the
truth -- that you are a chimpanzee. Only gradually, when I have forced myself out of
my thoughts back to reality, do my eyes show me again whose guest I am.
 Yes.
 You're so silent suddenly, I wonder why? Just a moment ago you were
pronouncing such astonishingly correct opinions about our town, and now you're so
$ 292
silent.
 Silent?
 Is something wrong? Shall I call the trainer? Perhaps you're in the habit of
taking a meal at this hour?
 No, no. It's quite all right. I can tell you what it was. Sometimes I'm overcome
with such an aversion to human beings that I can barely refrain from retching. This, of
course, has nothing to do with the individual human being, least of all with your
charming presence. It concerns all human beings. There's nothing extraordinary about
this. Suppose, for instance, that you were to live continuously with apes, you'd
probably have similar attacks, however great your self-control. Actually, it's not the
smell of human beings that repels me so much, it's the human smell which I have
contracted and which mingles with the smell from my native land. Smell for yourself!
Here, on my chest! Put your nose deeper into the fur! Deeper, I say!
 I'm sorry, but I can't smell anything special. Just the ordinary smell of a wellgroomed body, that's all. The nose of a city-dweller, of course, is no fair test. You, no
doubt, can scent thousands of things that evade us.
 Once upon a time, sir, once upon a time. That's over.
 Since you brought it up yourself, I dare to ask: How long have you actually been
living among us?
 Five years. On the fifth of April it will be five years.
 Terrific achievement. To cast off apehood in five years and gallop through the
whole evolution of mankind! Certainly no one has ever done that before! On this
racecourse you have no rival.
$ 293
 It's a great deal, I know, and sometimes it surpasses even my understanding. In
tranquil moments, however, I feel less exuberant about it. Do you know how I was
caught?
 I've read everything that's been printed about you. You were shot at and then
caught.
 Yes, I was hit twice, once here in the cheek -- the wound of course was far
larger than the scar you see -- and the second time below the hip. I'll take my trousers
down so you can see that scar, too. Here then was where the bullet entered; this was
the severe, decisive wound. I fell from the tree and when I came to I was in a cage
between decks.
 In a cage! Between decks! It's one thing to read your story, and quite another to
hear you tell it!
 And yet another, sir, to have experienced it. Until then I had never known what
it means to have no way out. It was not a four-sided barred cage, it had only three sides
nailed to a locker, the locker forming the fourth side. The whole contrivance was so
low that I could not stand upright, and so narrow that I could not even sit down. All I
could do was squat there with bent knees. In my rage I refused to see anyone, and so
remained facing the locker; for days and nights I squatted there with trembling knees
while behind me the bars cut into my flesh. This manner of confining wild animals is
considered to have its advantages during the first days of captivity, and from my
experience I cannot deny that from the human point of view this actually is the case.
But at that time I was not interested in the human point of view. I had the locker in
front of me. Break the boards, bite a hole through them, squeeze yourself through an
opening which in reality hardly allows you to see through it and which, when you first
discover it, you greet with the blissful howl of ignorance! Where do you want to go?
Beyond the boards the forest begins. . .
$ 294
Translated by Tania and James Stern
The Refusal
 OUR LITTLE TOWN does not lie on the frontier, nowhere near; it is so far from
the frontier, in fact, that perhaps no one from our town has ever been there; desolate
highlands have to be crossed as well as wide fertile plains. To imagine even part of the
road makes one tired, and more than part one just cannot imagine. There are also big
towns on the road, each far larger than ours. Ten little towns like ours laid side by side,
and ten more forced down from above, still would not produce one of these enormous,
overcrowded towns. If one does not get lost on the way one is bound to lose oneself in
these towns, and to avoid them is impossible on account of their size.
 But what is even further from our town than the frontier, if such distances can
be compared at all -- it's like saying that a man of three hundred years is older than
one of two hundred -- what is even further than the frontier is the capital. Whereas we
do get news of the frontier wars now and again, of the capital we learn next to nothing
$ 295
-- we civilians that is, for of course the government officials have very good
connections with the capital; they can get news from there in as little as three months,
so they claim at least.
 Now it is remarkable and I am continually being surprised by the way we in our
town humbly submit to all orders issued in the capital. For centuries no political
change has been brought about by the citizens themselves. In the capital great rulers
have superseded each other -- indeed, even dynasties have been deposed or
annihilated, and new ones have started; in the past century even the capital itself was
destroyed, a new one was founded far away from it, later on this too was destroyed and
the old one rebuilt, yet none of this had any influence on our little town. Our officials
have always remained at their posts; the highest officials came from the capital, the
less high from other towns, and the lowest from among ourselves -- that is how it has
always been and it has suited us. The highest official is the chief tax-collector, he has
the rank of colonel, and is known as such. The present one is an old man; I've known
him for years, because he was already a colonel when I was a child. At first he rose very
fast in his career, but then he seems to have advanced no further; actually, for our little
town his rank is good enough, a higher rank would be out of place. When I try to recall
him I see him sitting on the veranda of his house in the Market Square, leaning back,
pipe in mouth. Above him from the roof flutters the imperial flag; on the sides of the
veranda, which is so big that minor military maneuvers are sometimes held there,
washing hangs out to dry. His grandchildren, in beautiful silk clothes, play around
him; they are not allowed down in the Market Square, the children there are
considered unworthy of them, but the grandchildren are attracted by the Square, so
they thrust their heads between the posts of the banister and when the children below
begin to quarrel they join the quarrel from above.
 This colonel, then, commands the town. I don't think he has ever produced a
document entitling him to this position; very likely he does not possess such a thing.
Maybe he really is chief tax-collector. But is that all? Does that entitle him to rule over
$ 296
all the other departments in the administration as well? True, his office is very
important for the government, but for the citizens it is hardly the most important.
One is almost under the impression that the people here say: "Now that you've taken
all we possess, please take us as well." In reality, of course, it was not he who seized the
power, nor is he a tyrant. It has just come about over the years that the chief taxcollector is automatically the top official, and the colonel accepts the tradition just as
we do.
 Yet while he lives among us without laying too much stress on his official
position, he is something quite different from the ordinary citizen. When a delegation
comes to him with a request, he stands there like the wall of the world. Behind him is
nothingness, one imagines hearing voices whispering in the background, but this is
probably a delusion; after all, he represents the end of all things, at least for us. At
these receptions he really was worth seeing. Once as a child I was present when a
delegation of citizens arrived to ask him for a government subsidy because the poorest
quarter of the town had been burned to the ground. My father, the blacksmith, a man
well respected in the community, was a member of the delegation and had taken me
along. There's nothing exceptional about this, everyone rushes to spectacles of this
kind, one can hardly distinguish the actual delegation from the crowd. Since these
receptions usually take place on the veranda, there are even people who climb up by
ladder from the Market Square and take part in the goings-on from over the banister.
On this occasion about a quarter of the veranda had been reserved for the colonel, the
crowd filling the rest of it. A few soldiers kept watch, some of them standing around
him in a semicircle. Actually a single soldier would have been quite enough, such is
our fear of them. I don't know exactly where these soldiers come from, in any case
from a long way off, they all look very much alike, they wouldn't even need a uniform.
They are small, not strong but agile people, the most striking thing about them is the
prominence of their teeth which almost overcrowd their mouths, and a certain restless
twitching of their small narrow eyes. This makes them the terror of the children, but
also their delight, for again and again the children long to be frightened by these teeth,
$ 297
these eyes, so as to be able to run away in horror. Even grownups probably never quite
lose this childish terror, at least it continues to have an effect. There are, of course,
other factors contributing to it. The soldiers speak a dialect utterly incomprehensible
to us, and they can hardly get used to ours -- all of which produces a certain shut-off,
unapproachable quality corresponding, as it happens, to their character, for they are
silent, serious, and rigid. They don't actually do anything evil, and yet they are almost
unbearable in an evil sense. A soldier, for example, enters a shop, buys some trifling
object, and stays there leaning against the counter; he listens to the conversations,
probably does not understand them, and yet gives the impression of understanding; he
himself does not say a word, just stares blankly at the speaker, then back at the
listeners, all the while keeping his hand on the hilt of the long knife in his belt. This is
revolting, one loses the desire to talk, the customers start leaving the shop, and only
when it is quite empty does the soldier also leave. Thus wherever the soldiers appear,
our lively people grow silent. That's what happened this time, too. As on all solemn
occasions the colonel stood upright, holding in front of him two poles of bamboo in
his outstretched hands. This is an ancient custom implying more or less that he
supports the law, and the law supports him. Now everyone knows, of course, what to
expect up on the veranda, and yet each time people take fright all over again. On this
occasion, too, the man chosen to speak could not begin; he was already standing
opposite the colonel when his courage failed him and, muttering a few excuses, he
pushed his way back into the crowd. No other suitable person willing to speak could
be found, albeit several unsuitable ones offered themselves; a great commotion ensued
and messengers were sent in search of various citizens who were well-known speakers.
During all this time the colonel stood there motionless, only his chest moving visibly
up and down to his breathing. Not that he breathed with difficulty, it was just that he
breathed so conspicuously, much as frogs breathe -- except that with them it is
normal, while here it was exceptional. I squeezed myself through the grownups and
watched him through a gap between two soldiers, until one of them kicked me away
with his knee. Meanwhile the man originally chosen to speak had regained his
composure and, firmly held up by two fellow citizens, was delivering his address. It
$ 298
was touching to see him smile throughout this solemn speech describing a grievous
misfortune -- a most humble smile which strove in vain to elicit some slight reaction
on the colonel's face. Finally he formulated the request -- I think he was only asking
for a year's tax exemption, but possibly also for timber from the imperial forests at a
reduced price. Then he bowed low, remaining in this position for some time, as did
everyone else except the colonel, the soldiers, and a number of officials in the
background. To the child it seemed ridiculous that the people on the ladders should
climb down a few rungs so as not to be seen during the significant pause and now and
again peer inquisitively over the floor of the veranda. After this had lasted quite a
while an official, a little man, stepped up to the colonel and tried to reach the latter's
height by standing on his toes. The colonel, still motionless save for his deep
breathing, whispered something in his ear, whereupon the little man clapped his
hands and everyone rose. "The petition has been refused," he announced. "You may
go." An undeniable sense of relief passed through the crowd, everyone surged out,
hardly a soul paying any special attention to the colonel, who, as it were, had turned
once more into a human being like the rest of us. I still caught one last glimpse of him
as he wearily let go of the poles, which fell to the ground, then sank into an armchair
produced by some officials, and promptly put his pipe in his mouth.
 This whole occurrence is not isolated, it's in the general run of things. Indeed,
it does happen now and again that minor petitions are granted, but then it invariably
looks as though the colonel had done it as a powerful private person on his own
responsibility, and it had to be kept all but a secret from the government -- not
explicitly of course, but that is what it feels like. No doubt in our little town the
colonel's eyes, so far as we know, are also the eyes of the government, and yet there is a
difference which it is impossible to comprehend completely.
 In all important matters, however, the citizens can always count on a refusal.
And now the strange fact is that without this refusal one simply cannot get along, yet
at the same time these official occasions designed to receive the refusal are by no
$ 299
means a formality. Time after time one goes there full of expectation and in all
seriousness and then one returns, if not exactly strengthened or happy, nevertheless
not disappointed or tired. About these things I do not have to ask the opinion of
anyone else, I feel them in myself, as everyone does; nor do I have any great desire to
find out how these things are connected.
 As a matter of fact there is, so far as my observations go, a certain age group
that is not content -- these are the young people roughly between seventeen and
twenty. Quite young fellows, in fact, who are utterly incapable of foreseeing the
consequences of even the least significant, far less a revolutionary, idea. And it is
among just them that discontent creeps in.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
A Hunger Artist
 DURING these last decades the interest in professional fasting has markedly
diminished. It used to pay very well to stage such great performances under one's own
$ 300
management, but today that is quite impossible. We live in a different world now. At
one time the whole town took a lively interest in the hunger artist; from day to day of
his fast the excitement mounted; everybody wanted to see him at least once a day;
there were people who bought season tickets for the last few days and sat from
morning till night in front of his small barred cage; even in the nighttime there were
visiting hours, when the whole effect was heightened by torch flares; on fine days the
cage was set out in the open air, and then it was the children's special treat to see the
hunger artist; for their elders he was often just a joke that happened to be in fashion,
but the children stood openmouthed, holding each other's hands for greater security,
marveling at him as he sat there pallid in black tights, with his ribs sticking out so
prominently, not even on a seat but down among straw on the ground, sometimes
giving a courteous nod, answering questions with a constrained smile, or perhaps
stretching an arm through the bars so that one might feel how thin it was, and then
again withdrawing deep into himself, paying no attention to anyone or anything, not
even to the all-important striking of the clock that was the only piece of furniture in
his cage, but merely staring into vacancy with half-shut eyes, now and then taking a sip
from a tiny glass of water to moisten his lips.
 Besides casual onlookers there were also relays of permanent watchers selected
by the public, usually butchers, strangely enough, and it was their task to watch the
hunger artist day and night, three of them at a time, in case he should have some
secret recourse to nourishment. This was nothing but a formality, instituted to
reassure the masses, for the initiates knew well enough that during his fast the artist
would never in any circumstances, not even under forcible compulsion, swallow the
smallest morsel of food; the honor of his profession forbade it. Not every watcher, of
course, was capable of understanding this, there were often groups of night watchers
who were very lax in carrying out their duties and deliberately huddled together in a
retired corner to play cards with great absorption, obviously intending to give the
hunger artist the chance of a little refreshment, which they supposed he could draw
from some private hoard. Nothing annoyed the artist more than such watchers; they
$ 301
made him miserable; they made his fast seem unendurable; sometimes he mastered his
feebleness sufficiently to sing during their watch for as long as he could keep going, to
show them how unjust their suspicions were. But that was of little use; they only
wondered at his cleverness in being able to fill his mouth even while singing. Much
more to his taste were the watchers who sat close up to the bars, who were not content
with the dim night lighting of the hall but focused him in the full glare of the electric
pocket torch given them by the impresario. The harsh light did not trouble him at all,
in any case he could never sleep properly, and he could always drowse a little,
whatever the light, at any hour, even when the hall was thronged with noisy onlookers.
He was quite happy at the prospect of spending a sleepless night with such watchers;
he was ready to exchange jokes with them, to tell them stories out of his nomadic life,
anything at all to keep them awake and demonstrate to them again that he had no
eatables in his cage and that he was fasting as not one of them could fast. But his
happiest moment was when the morning came and an enormous breakfast was
brought them, at his expense, on which they flung themselves with the keen appetite
of healthy men after a weary night of wakefulness. Of course there were people who
argued that this breakfast was an unfair attempt to bribe the watchers, but that was
going rather too far, and when they were invited to take on a night's vigil without a
breakfast, merely for the sake of the cause, they made themselves scarce, although they
stuck stubbornly to their suspicions.
 Such suspicions, anyhow, were a necessary accompaniment to the profession of
fasting. No one could possibly watch the hunger artist continuously, day and night,
and so no one could produce first-hand evidence that the fast had really been rigorous
and continuous; only the artist himself could know that, he was therefore bound to be
the sole completely satisfied spectator of his own fast. Yet for other reasons he was
never satisfied; it was not perhaps mere fasting that had brought him to such skeleton
thinness that many people had regretfully to keep away from his exhibitions, because
the sight of him was too much for them, perhaps it was dissatisfaction with himself
that had worn him down. For he alone knew, what no other initiate knew, how easy it
$ 302
was to fast. It was the easiest thing in the world. He made no secret of this, yet people
did not believe him, at the best they set him down as modest, most of them, however,
thought he was out for publicity or else was some kind of cheat who found it easy to
fast because he had discovered a way of making it easy, and then had the impudence to
admit the fact, more or less. He had to put up with all that, and in the course of time
had got used to it, but his inner dissatisfaction always rankled, and never yet, after any
term of fasting -- this must be granted to his credit -- had he left the cage of his own
free will. The longest period of fasting was fixed by his impresario at forty days,
beyond that term he was not allowed to go, not even in great cities, and there was
good reason for it, too. Experience had proved that for about forty days the interest of
the public could be stimulated by a steadily increasing pressure of advertisement, but
after that the town began to lose interest, sympathetic support began notably to fall
off; there were of course local variations as between one town and another or one
country and another, but as a general rule forty days marked the limit. So on the
fortieth day the flower-bedecked cage was opened, enthusiastic spectators filled the
hall, a military band played, two doctors entered the cage to measure the results of the
fast, which were announced through a megaphone, and finally two young ladies
appeared, blissful at having been selected for the honor, to help the hunger artist down
the few steps leading to a small table on which was spread a carefully chosen invalid
repast. And at this very moment the artist always turned stubborn. True, he would
entrust his bony arms to the outstretched helping hands of the ladies bending over
him, but stand up he would not. Why stop fasting at this particular moment, after
forty days of it? He had held out for a long time, an illimitably long time; why stop
now, when he was in his best fasting form, or rather, not yet quite in his best fasting
form? Why should he be cheated of the fame he would get for fasting longer, for being
not only the record hunger artist of all time, which presumably he was already, but for
beating his own record by a performance beyond human imagination, since he felt
that there were no limits to his capacity for fasting? His public pretended to admire
him so much, why should it have so little patience with him; if he could endure fasting
longer, why shouldn't the public endure it? Besides, he was tired, he was comfortable
$ 303
sitting in the straw, and now he was supposed to lift himself to his full height and go
down to a meal the very thought of which gave him a nausea that only the presence of
the ladies kept him from betraying, and even that with an effort. And he looked up
into the eyes of the ladies who were apparently so friendly and in reality so cruel, and
shook his head, which felt too heavy on its strengthless neck. But then there happened
yet again what always happened. The impresario came forward, without a word -- for
the band made speech impossible -- lifted his arms in the air above the artist, as if
inviting Heaven to look down upon its creature here in the straw, this suffering
martyr, which indeed he was, although in quite another sense; grasped him around the
emaciated waist, with exaggerated caution, so that the frail condition he was in might
be appreciated; and committed him to the care of the blenching ladies, not without
secretly giving him a shaking so that his legs and body tottered and swayed. The artist
now submitted completely; his head lolled on his breast as if it had landed there by
chance; his body was hollowed out; his legs in a spasm of self-preservation clung close
to each other at the knees, yet scraped on the ground as if it were not really solid
ground, as if they were only trying to find solid ground; and the whole weight of his
body, a featherweight after all, relapsed onto one of the ladies, who, looking around for
help and panting a little -- this post of honor was not at all what she had expected it to
be -- first stretched her neck as far as she could to keep her face at least free from
contact with the artist, then finding this impossible, and her more fortunate
companion not coming to her aid but merely holding extended in her own trembling
hand the little bunch of knucklebones that was the artist's, to the great delight of the
spectators burst into tears and had to be replaced by an attendant who had long been
stationed in readiness. Then came the food, a little of which the impresario managed
to get between the artist's lips, while he sat in a kind of half-fainting trance, to the
accompaniment of cheerful patter designed to distract the public's attention from the
artist's condition; after that, a toast was drunk to the public, supposedly prompted by a
whisper from the artist in the impresario's ear; the band confirmed it with a mighty
flourish, the spectators melted away, and no one had any cause to be dissatisfied with
the proceedings, no one except the hunger artist himself, he only, as always.
$ 304
 So he lived for many years, with small regular intervals of recuperation, in
visible glory, honored by the world, yet in spite of that troubled in spirit, and all the
more troubled because no one would take his trouble seriously. What comfort could
he possibly need? What more could he possibly wish for? And if some good-natured
person, feeling sorry for him, tried to console him by pointing out that his melancholy
was probably caused by fasting, it could happen, especially when he had been fasting
for some time, that he reacted with an outburst of fury and to the general alarm began
to shake the bars of his cage like a wild animal. Yet the impresario had a way of
punishing these outbreaks which he rather enjoyed putting into operation. He would
apologize publicly for the artist's behavior, which was only to be excused, he admitted,
because of the irritability caused by fasting; a condition hardly to be understood by
well-fed people; then by natural transition he went on to mention the artist's equally
incomprehensible boast that he could fast for much longer than he was doing; he
praised the high ambition, the good will, the great self-denial undoubtedly implicit in
such a statement; and then quite simply countered it by bringing out photographs,
which were also on sale to the public, showing the artist on the fortieth day of a fast
lying in bed almost dead from exhaustion. This perversion of the truth, familiar to the
artist though it was, always unnerved him afresh and proved too much for him. What
was a consequence of the premature ending of his fast was here presented as the cause
of it! To fight against this lack of understanding, against a whole world of nonunderstanding, was impossible. Time and again in good faith he stood by the bars
listening to the impresario, but as soon as the photographs appeared he always let go
and sank with a groan back onto his straw, and the reassured public could once more
come close and gaze at him.
 A few years later when the witnesses of such scenes called them to mind, they
often failed to understand themselves at all. For meanwhile the aforementioned
change in public interest had set in; it seemed to happen almost overnight; there may
have been profound causes for it, but who was going to bother about that; at any rate
the pampered hunger artist suddenly found himself deserted one fine day by the
$ 305
amusement-seekers, who went streaming past him to other more-favored attractions.
For the last time the impresario hurried him over half Europe to discover whether the
old interest might still survive here and there; all in vain; everywhere, as if by secret
agreement, a positive revulsion from professional fasting was in evidence. Of course it
could not really have sprung up so suddenly as all that, and many premonitory
symptoms which had not been sufficiently remarked or suppressed during the rush
and glitter of success now came retrospectively to mind, but it was now too late to take
any countermeasures. Fasting would surely come into fashion again at some future
date, yet that was no comfort for those living in the present. What, then, was the
hunger artist to do? He had been applauded by thousands in his time and could hardly
come down to showing himself in a street booth at village fairs, and as for adopting
another profession, he was not only too old for that but too fanatically devoted to
fasting. So he took leave of the impresario, his partner in an unparalleled career, and
hired himself to a large circus; in order to spare his own feelings he avoided reading
the conditions of his contract.
 A large circus with its enormous traffic in replacing and recruiting men,
animals, and apparatus can always find a use for people at any time, even for a hunger
artist, provided of course that he does not ask too much, and in this particular case
anyhow it was not only the artist who was taken on but his famous and long-known
name as well, indeed considering the peculiar nature of his performance, which was
not impaired by advancing age, it could not be objected that here was an artist past his
prime, no longer at the height of his professional skill, seeking a refuge in some quiet
corner of a circus; on the contrary, the hunger artist averred that he could fast as well
as ever, which was entirely credible, he even alleged that if he were allowed to fast as
he liked, and this was at once promised him without more ado, he could astound the
world by establishing a record never yet achieved, a statement that certainly provoked
a smile among the other professionals, since it left out of account the change in public
opinion, which the hunger artist in his zeal conveniently forgot.
$ 306
 He had not, however, actually lost his sense of the real situation and took it as a
matter of course that he and his cage should be stationed, not in the middle of the ring
as a main attraction, but outside, near the animal cages, on a site that was after all
easily accessible. Large and gaily painted placards made a frame for the cage and
announced what was to be seen inside it. When the public came thronging out in the
intervals to see the animals, they could hardly avoid passing the hunger artist's cage
and stopping there for a moment, perhaps they might even have stayed longer had not
those pressing behind them in the narrow gangway, who did not understand why they
should be held up on their way toward the excitements of the menagerie, made it
impossible for anyone to stand gazing quietly for any length of time. And that was the
reason why the hunger artist, who had of course been looking forward to these visiting
hours as the main achievement of his life, began instead to shrink from them. At first
he could hardly wait for the intervals; it was exhilarating to watch the crowds come
streaming his way, until only too soon -- not even the most obstinate self-deception,
clung to almost consciously, could hold out against the fact -- the conviction was
borne in upon him that these people, most of them, to judge from their actions, again
and again, without exception, were all on their way to the menagerie. And the first
sight of them from the distance remained the best. For when they reached his cage he
was at once deafened by the storm of shouting and abuse that arose from the two
contending factions, which renewed themselves continuously, of those who wanted to
stop and stare at him -- he soon began to dislike them more than the others -- not out
of real interest but only out of obstinate self-assertiveness, and those who wanted to go
straight on to the animals. When the first great rush was past, the stragglers came
along, and these, whom nothing could have prevented from stopping to look at him as
long as they had breath, raced past with long strides, hardly even glancing at him, in
their haste to get to the menagerie in time. And all too rarely did it happen that he had
a stroke of luck, when some father of a family fetched up before him with his children,
pointed a finger at the hunger artist, and explained at length what the phenomenon
meant, telling stories of earlier years when he himself had watched similar but much
more thrilling performances, and the children, still rather uncomprehending, since
$ 307
neither inside nor outside school had they been sufficiently prepared for this lesson --
what did they care about fasting? -- yet showed by the brightness of their intent eyes
that new and better times might be coming. Perhaps, said the hunger artist to himself
many a time, things would be a little better if his cage were set not quite so near the
menagerie. That made it too easy for people to make their choice, to say nothing of
what he suffered from the stench of the menagerie, the animals' restlessness by night,
the carrying past of raw lumps of flesh for the beasts of prey, the roaring at feeding
times, which depressed him continually. But he did not dare to lodge a complaint with
the management; after all, he had the animals to thank for the troops of people who
passed his cage, among whom there might always be one here and there to take an
interest in him, and who could tell where they might seclude him if he called attention
to his existence and thereby to the fact that, strictly speaking, he was only an
impediment on the way to the menagerie.
 A small impediment, to be sure, one that grew steadily less. People grew
familiar with the strange idea that they could be expected, in times like these, to take
an interest in a hunger artist, and with this familiarity the verdict went out against
him. He might fast as much as he could, and he did so; but nothing could save him
now, people passed him by. Just try to explain to anyone the art of fasting! Anyone
who has no feeling for it cannot be made to understand it. The fine placards grew dirty
and illegible, they were torn down; the little notice board telling the number of fast
days achieved, which at first was changed carefully every day, had long stayed at the
same figure, for after the first few weeks even this small task seemed pointless to the
staff; and so the artist simply fasted on and on, as he had once dreamed of doing, and it
was no trouble to him, just as he had always foretold, but no one counted the days, no
one, not even the artist himself, knew what records he was already breaking, and his
heart grew heavy. And when once in a while some leisurely passer-by stopped, made
merry over the old figure on the board, and spoke of swindling, that was in its way the
stupidest lie ever invented by indifference and inborn malice, since it was not the
hunger artist who was cheating, he was working honestly, but the world was cheating
$ 308
him of his reward.
 Many more days went by, however, and that too came to an end. An overseer's
eye fell on the cage one day and he asked the attendants why this perfectly good cage
should be left standing there unused with dirty straw inside it; nobody knew, until one
man, helped out by the notice board, remembered about the hunger artist. They poked
into the straw with sticks and found him in it. "Are you still fasting?" asked the
overseer, "when on earth do you mean to stop?" "Forgive me, everybody," whispered
the hunger artist; only the overseer, who had his ear to the bars, understood him. "Of
course," said the overseer, and tapped his forehead with a finger to let the attendants
know what state the man was in, "we forgive you." "I always wanted you to admire my
fasting," said the hunger artist. "We do admire it," said the overseer, affably. "But you
shouldn't admire it," said the hunger artist. "Well then we don't admire it," said the
overseer, "but why shouldn't we admire it?" "Because I have to fast, I can't help it," said
the hunger artist. "What a fellow you are," said the overseer, "and why can't you help
it?" "Because," said the hunger artist, lifting his head a little and speaking, with his lips
pursed, as if for a kiss, right into the overseer's ear, so that no syllable might be lost,
"because I couldn't find the food I liked. If I had found it, believe me, I should have
made no fuss and stuffed myself like you or anyone else." These were his last words,
but in his dimming eyes remained the firm though no longer proud persuasion that he
was still continuing to fast.
 "Well, clear this out now!" said the overseer, and they buried the hunger artist,
straw and all. Into the cage they put a young panther. Even the most insensitive felt it
refreshing to see this wild creature leaping around the cage that had so long been
dreary. The panther was all right. The food he liked was brought him without
hesitation by the attendants; he seemed not even to miss his freedom; his noble body,
furnished almost to the bursting point with all that it needed, seemed to carry freedom
around with it too; somewhere in his jaws it seemed to lurk; and the joy of life
streamed with such ardent passion from his throat that for the onlookers it was not
$ 309
easy to stand the shock of it. But they braced themselves, crowded around the cage,
and did not want ever to move away.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Investigations of a Dog
 How MUCH my life has changed, and yet how unchanged it has remained at
bottom! When I think back and recall the time when I was still a member of the canine
community, sharing in all its preoccupations, a dog among dogs, I find on closer
examination that from the very beginning I sensed some discrepancy, some little
maladjustment, causing a slight feeling of discomfort which not even the most
decorous public functions could eliminate; more, that sometimes, no, not sometimes,
but very often, the mere look of some fellow dog of my own circle that I was fond of,
the mere look of him, as if I had just caught it for the first time, would fill me with
helpless embarrassment and fear, even with despair. I tried to quiet my apprehensions
as best I could; friends, to whom I divulged them, helped me; more peaceful times
$ 310
came -- times, it is true, in which these sudden surprises were not lacking, but in
which they were accepted with more philosophy, fitted into my life with more
philosophy, inducing a certain melancholy and lethargy, it may be, but nevertheless
allowing me to carry on as a somewhat cold, reserved, shy, and calculating, but all
things considered normal enough dog. How, indeed, without these breathing spells,
could I have reached the age that I enjoy at present; how could I have fought my way
through to the serenity with which I contemplate the terrors of youth and endure the
terrors of age; how could I have come to the point where I am able to draw the
consequences of my admittedly unhappy, or, to put it more moderately, not very
happy disposition, and live almost entirely in accordance with them? Solitary and
withdrawn, with nothing to occupy me save my hopeless but, as far as I am concerned,
indispensable little investigations, that is how I live; yet in my distant isolation I have
not lost sight of my people, news often penetrates to me, and now and then I even let
news of myself reach them. The others treat me with respect but do not understand
my way of life; yet they bear me no grudge, and even young dogs whom I sometimes
see passing in the distance, a new generation of whose childhood I have only a vague
memory, do not deny me a reverential greeting.
 For it must not be assumed that, for all my peculiarities, which lie open to the
day, I am so very different from the rest of my species. Indeed when I reflect on it --
and I have time and disposition and capacity enough for that -- I see that dogdom is in
every way a marvelous institution. Apart from us dogs there are all sorts of creatures
in the world, wretched, limited, dumb creatures who have no language but mechanical
cries; many of us dogs study them, have given them names, try to help them, educate
them, uplift them, and so on. For my part I am quite indifferent to them except when
they try to disturb me, I confuse them with one another, I ignore them. But one thing
is too obvious to have escaped me; namely how little inclined they are, compared with
us dogs, to stick together, how silently and unfamiliarly and with what a curious
hostility they pass each other by, how only the basest of interests can bind them
together for a little in ostensible union, and how often these very interests give rise to
$ 311
hatred and conflict. Consider us dogs, on the other hand! One can safely say that we all
live together in a literal heap, all of us, different as we are from one another on account
of numberless and profound modifications which have arisen in the course of time. All
in one heap! We are drawn to each other and nothing can prevent us from satisfying
that communal impulse; all our laws and institutions, the few that I still know and the
many that I have forgotten, go back to this longing for the greatest bliss we are capable
of, the warm comfort of being together. But now consider the other side of the picture.
No creatures to my knowledge live in such wide dispersion as we dogs, none have so
many distinctions of class, of kind, of occupation, distinctions too numerous to review
at a glance; we, whose one desire is to stick together -- and again and again we succeed
at transcendent moments in spite of everything -- we above all others live so widely
separated from one another, engaged in strange vocations that are often
incomprehensible even to our canine neighbors, holding firmly to laws that are not
those of the dog world, but are actually directed against it. How baffling these
questions are, questions on which one would prefer not to touch -- I understand that
standpoint too, even better than my own -- and yet questions to which I have
completely capitulated. Why do I not do as the others: live in harmony with my people
and accept in silence whatever disturbs the harmony, ignoring it as a small error in the
great account, always keeping in mind the things that bind us happily together, not
those that drive us again and again, as though by sheer force, out of our social circle?
 I can recall an incident in my youth; I was at the time in one of those
inexplicable blissful states of exaltation which everyone must have experienced as a
child; I was still quite a puppy, everything pleased me, everything was my concern. I
believed that great things were going on around me of which I was the leader and to
which I must lend my voice, things which must be wretchedly thrown aside if I did not
run for them and wag my tail for them -- childish fantasies that faded with riper years.
But at the time their power was very great, I was completely under their spell, and
presently something actually did happen, something so extraordinary that it seemed to
justify my wild expectations. In itself it was nothing very extraordinary, for I have seen
$ 312
many such things, and more remarkable things too, often enough since, but at the
time it struck me with all the force of a first impression, one of those impressions
which can never be erased and influence much of one's later conduct. I encountered,
in short, a little company of dogs, or rather I did not encounter them, they appeared
before me. Before that I had been running along in darkness for some time, filled with
a premonition of great things -- a premonition that may well have been delusive, for I
always had it. I had run in darkness for a long time, up and down, blind and deaf to
everything, led on by nothing but a vague desire, and now I suddenly came to a stop
with the feeling that I was in the right place, and looking up saw that it was bright day,
only a little hazy, and everywhere a blending and confusion of the most intoxicating
smells; I greeted the morning with an uncertain barking, when -- as if I had conjured
them up -- out of some place of darkness, to the accompaniment of terrible sounds
such as I had never heard before, seven dogs stepped into the light. Had I not distinctly
seen that they were dogs and that they, themselves brought the sound with them --
though I could not recognize how they produced it -- I would have run away at once;
but as it was I stayed. At that time I still knew hardly anything of the creative gift for
music with which the canine race alone is endowed, it had naturally enough escaped
my but slowly developing powers of observation; for though music had surrounded me
as a perfectly natural and indispensable element of existence ever since I was a
suckling, an element which nothing impelled me to distinguish from the rest of
existence, my elders had drawn my attention to it only by such hints as were suitable
for a childish understanding; all the more astonishing, then, indeed devastating, were
these seven great musical artists to me. They did not speak, they did not sing, they
remained generally silent, almost determinedly silent; but from the empty air they
conjured music. Everything was music, the lifting and setting down of their feet,
certain turns of the head, their running and their standing still, the positions they took
up in relation to one another, the symmetrical patterns which they produced by one
dog setting his front paws on the back of another and the rest following suit until the
first bore the weight of the other six, or by all lying flat on the ground and going
through complicated concerted evolutions; and none made a false move, not even the
$ 313
last dog, though he was a little unsure, did not always establish contact at once with
the others, sometimes hesitated, as it were, on the stroke of the beat, but yet was
unsure only by comparison with the superb sureness of the others, and even if he had
been much more unsure, indeed quite unsure, would not have been able to do any
harm, the others, great masters all of them, keeping the rhythm so unshakably. But it
is too much to say that I even saw them, that I actually even saw them. They appeared
from somewhere, I inwardly greeted them as dogs, and although I was profoundly
confused by the sounds that accompanied them, yet they were dogs nevertheless, dogs
like you and me; I regarded them by force of habit simply as dogs I had happened to
meet on my road, and felt a wish to approach them and exchange greetings; they were
quite near too, dogs much older than me, certainly, and not of my woolly, long-haired
kind, but yet not so very alien in size and shape, indeed quite familiar to me, for I had
already seen many such or similar dogs; but while I was still involved in these
reflections the music gradually got the upper hand, literally knocked the breath out of
me and swept me far away from those actual little dogs, and quite against my will,
while I howled as if some pain were being inflicted upon me, my mind could attend to
nothing but this blast of music which seemed to come from all sides, from the heights,
from the deeps, from everywhere, surrounding the listener, overwhelming him,
crushing him, and over his swooning body still blowing fanfares so near that they
seemed far away and almost inaudible. And then a respite came, for one was already
too exhausted, too annulled, too feeble to listen any longer; a respite came and I
beheld again the seven little dogs carrying out their evolutions, making their leaps; I
longed to shout to them in spite of their aloofness, to beg them to enlighten me, to ask
them what they were doing -- I was a child and believed I could ask anybody about
anything -- but hardly had I begun, hardly did I feel on good and familiar doggish
terms with the seven, when the music started again, robbed me of my wits, whirled me
around in its circles as if I myself were one of the musicians instead of being only their
victim, cast me hither and thither, no matter how much I begged for mercy, and
rescued me finally from its own violence by driving me into a labyrinth of wooden bars
which rose around that place, though I had not noticed it before, but which now firmly
$ 314
caught me, kept my head pressed to the ground, and though the music still resounded
in the open space behind me, gave me a little time to get my breath back. I must admit
that I was less surprised by the artistry of the seven dogs -- it was incomprehensible to
me, and also quite definitely beyond my capacities -- than by their courage in facing so
openly the music of their own making, and their power to endure it calmly without
collapsing. But now from my hiding hole I saw, on looking more closely, that it was
not so much coolness as the most extreme tension that characterized their
performance; these limbs apparently so sure in their movements quivered at every step
with a perpetual apprehensive twitching; as if rigid with despair the dogs kept their
eyes fixed on one another, and their tongues, whenever the tension weakened for a
moment, hung wearily from their jowls. It could not be fear of failure that agitated
them so deeply; dogs that could dare and achieve such things had no need to fear that.
Then why were they afraid? Who then forced them to do what they were doing? And I
could no longer restrain myself, particularly as they now seemed in some
incomprehensible way in need of help, and so through all the din of the music I
shouted out my questions loudly and challengingly. But they -- incredible! incredible! -
- they never replied, behaved as if I were not there. Dogs who make no reply to the
greeting of other dogs are guilty of an offense against good manners which the
humblest dog would never pardon any more than the greatest. Perhaps they were not
dogs at all? But how should they not be dogs? Could I not actually hear on listening
more closely the subdued cries with which they encouraged each other, drew each
other's attention to difficulties, warned each other against errors; could I not see the
last and youngest dog, to whom most of those cries were addressed, often stealing a
glance at me as if he would have dearly wished to reply, but refrained because it was
not allowed? But why should it not be allowed, why should the very thing which our
laws unconditionally command not be allowed in this one case? I became indignant at
the thought and almost forgot the music. Those dogs were violating the law. Great
magicians they might be, but the law was valid for them too, I knew that quite well
though I was a child. And having recognized that, I now noticed something else. They
had good grounds for remaining silent, that is, assuming that they remained silent
$ 315
from a sense of shame. For how were they conducting themselves? Because of all the
music I had not noticed it before, but they had flung away all shame, the wretched
creatures were doing the very thing which is both most ridiculous and indecent in our
eyes; they were walking on their hind legs. Fie on them! They were uncovering their
nakedness, blatantly making a show of their nakedness: they were doing that as though
it were a meritorious act, and when, obeying their better instincts for a moment, they
happened to let their front paws fall, they were literally appalled as if at an error, as if
Nature were an error, hastily raised their legs again, and their eyes seemed to be
begging for forgiveness for having been forced to cease momentarily from their
abomination. Was the world standing on its head? Where could I be? What could have
happened? If only for my own sake I dared not hesitate any longer now, I dislodged
myself from the tangle of bars, took one leap into the open and made toward the dogs
-- I, the young pupil, must be the teacher now, must make them understand what they
were doing, must keep them from committing further sin. "And old dogs too! And old
dogs too!" I kept on saying to myself. But scarcely was I free and only a leap or two
away from the dogs, when the music again had me in its power. Perhaps in my
eagerness I might even have managed to withstand it, for I knew it better now, if in the
midst of all its majestic amplitude, which was terrifying, but still not inconquerable, a
clear, piercing, continuous note which came without variation literally from the
remotest distance -- perhaps the real melody in the midst of the music -- had not now
rung out, forcing me to my knees. Oh, the music these dogs made almost drove me out
of my senses! I could not move a step farther, I no longer wanted to instruct them;
they could go on raising their front legs, committing sin and seducing others to the sin
of silently regarding them; I was such a young dog -- who could demand such a
difficult task from me? I made myself still more insignificant than I was, I whimpered,
and if the dogs had asked me now what I thought of their performance, probably I
would have had not a word to say against it. Besides, it was not long before the dogs
vanished with all their music and their radiance into the darkness from which they had
emerged.
$ 316
 As I have already said, this whole episode contains nothing of much note; in
the course of a long life one encounters all sorts of things which, taken from their
context and seen through the eyes of a child, might well seem far more astonishing.
Besides, one may, of course -- in the pungent popular phrase -- have "got it all wrong,"
as well as everything connected with it; then it could bedemonstrated that this was
simply a case where seven musicians had assembled to practice their art in the
morning stillness, that a very young dog had strayed to the place, a burdensome
intruder whom they had tried to drive away by particularly terrifying or lofty music,
unfortunately without success. He pestered them with his questions: Were they,
already disturbed enough by the mere presence of the stranger, to be expected to
attend to his distracting interruptions as well and make them worse by responding to
them? Even if the law commands us to reply to everybody, was such a tiny stray dog in
truth a somebody worthy of the name? And perhaps they did not even understand
him, for he likely enough barked his questions very indistinctly. Or perhaps they did
understand him and with great self-control answered his questions, but he, a mere
puppy unaccustomed to music, could not distinguish the answer from the music. And
as for walking on their hind legs, perhaps, unlike other dogs, they actually used only
these for walking; if it was a sin, well, it was a sin. But they were alone, seven friends
together, an intimate gathering within their own four walls so to speak, quite private
so to speak; for one's friends, after all, are not the public, and where the public is not
present an inquisitive little street dog is certainly not capable of constituting it; but,
granting this, is it not as if nothing at all had happened? It is not quite so, but very
nearly so, and parents should not let their children run about so freely, and had much
better teach them to hold their tongues and respect the aged.
 If all this is admitted, then it disposes of the whole case. But many things that
are disposed of in the minds of grownups are not yet settled in the minds of the young.
I rushed about, told my story, asked questions, made accusations and investigations,
tried to drag others to the place where all this had happened, and burned to show
everybody where I had stood and where the seven had stood, and where and how they
$ 317
had danced and made their music; and if anyone had come with me, instead of shaking
me off and laughing at me, I would probably have sacrificed my innocence and tried
myself to stand on my hind legs so as to reconstruct the scene clearly. Now children
are blamed for all they do, but also in the last resort forgiven for all they do. And I have
preserved my childlike qualities, and in spite of that have grown to be an old dog. Well,
just as at that time I kept on unceasingly discussing the foregoing incident -- which
today I must confess I lay far less importance upon -- analyzing it into constituent
parts, arguing it with my listeners without regard to the company I found myself in,
devoting my whole time to the problem, which I found as wearisome as everybody
else, but which -- that was the difference -- for that very reason I was resolved to
pursue indefatigably until I solved it, so that I might be left free again to regard the
ordinary, calm, happy life of every day. Just so have I, though with less childish means -
- yet the difference is not so very great -- labored in the years since and go on laboring
today.
 But it began with that concert. I do not blame the concert; it is my innate
disposition that has driven me on, and it would certainly have found some other
opportunity of coming into action had the concert never taken place. Yet the fact that
it happened so soon used to make me feel sorry for myself; it robbed me of a great part
of my childhood; the blissful life of the young dog, which many can spin out for years,
in my case lasted for only a few short months. So be it. There are more important
things than childhood. And perhaps I have the prospect of far more childlike
happiness, earned by a life of hard work, in my old age than any actual child would
have the strength to bear, but which then I shall possess.
 I began my inquiries with the simplest things; there was no lack of material; it is
the actual superabundance, unfortunately, that casts me into despair in my darker
hours. I began to inquire into the question what the canine race nourished itself upon.
Now that is, if you like, by no means a simple question, of course; it has occupied us
since the dawn of time, it is the chief object of all our meditation, countless
$ 318
observations and essays and views on this subject have been published, it has grown
into a province of knowledge which in its prodigious compass is not only beyond the
comprehension of any single scholar, but of all our scholars collectively, a burden
which cannot be borne except by the whole of the dog community, and even then with
difficulty and not quite in its totality; for it ever and again crumbles away like a
neglected ancestral inheritance and must laboriously be rehabilitated anew -- not to
speak at all of the difficulties and almost unfulfillable conditions of my investigation.
No one need point all this out to me, I know it all as well as any average dog; I have no
ambition to meddle with real scientific matters, I have all the respect for knowledge
that it deserves, but to increase knowledge I lack the equipment, the diligence, the
leisure, and -- not least, and particularly during the past few years -- the desire as well.
I swallow down my food, but the slightest preliminary methodical politico-economical
observation of it does not seem to me worth while. In this connection the essence of
all knowledge is enough for me, the simple rule with which the mother weans her
young ones from her teats and sends them out into the world: "Water the ground as
much as you can." And in this sentence is not almost everything contained? What has
scientific inquiry, ever since our first fathers inaugurated it, of decisive importance to
add to this? Mere details, mere details, and how uncertain they are: but this rule will
remain as long as we are dogs. It concerns our main staple of food: true, we have also
other resources, but only at a pinch, and if the year is not too bad we could live on this
main staple of our food; this food we find on the earth, but the earth needs our water
to nourish it and only at that price provides us with our food, the emergence of which,
however, and this should not be forgotten, can also be hastened by certain spells,
songs, and ritual movements. But in my opinion that is all; there is nothing else that is
fundamental to be said on the question. In this opinion, moreover, I am at one with
the vast majority of the dog community, and must firmly dissociate myself from all
heretical views on this point. Quite honestly I have no ambition to be peculiar, or to
pose as being in the right against the majority; I am only too happy when I can agree
with my comrades, as I do in this case. My own inquiries, however, are in another
direction. My personal observation tells me that the earth, when it is watered and
$ 319
scratched according to the rules of science, extrudes nourishment, and moreover in
such quality, in such abundance, in such ways, in such places, at such hours as the laws
partially or completely established by science demand. I accept all this; my question,
however, is the following: "Whence does the earth procure this food?" A question
which people in general pretend not to understand, and to which the best answer they
can give is: "If you haven't enough to eat, we'll give you some of ours." Now consider
this answer. I know that it is not one of the virtues of dogdom to share with others
food that one has once gained possession of. Life is hard, the earth stubborn, science
rich in knowledge but poor in practical results: anyone who has food keeps it to
himself; that is not selfishness, but the opposite, dog law, the unanimous decision of
the people, the outcome of their victory over egoism, for the possessors are always in a
minority. And for that reason this answer: "If you haven't enough to eat, we'll give you
some of ours" is merely a way of speaking, a jest, a form of raillery. I have not forgotten
that. But all the more significant did it seem to me, when I was rushing about
everywhere with my questions during those days, that they put mockery aside as far as
I was concerned; true, they did not actually give me anything to eat -- where could
they have found it at a moment's notice? -- and even if anyone chanced to have some
food, naturally he forgot everything else in the fury of his hunger; yet they all seriously
meant what they said when they made the offer, and here and there, right enough, I
was presently allowed some slight trifle if I was only smart enough to snatch it quickly.
How came it that people treated me so strangely, pampered me, favored me? Because I
was a lean dog, badly fed and neglectful of my needs? But there were countless badly
fed dogs running about, and the others snatched even the wretchedest scrap from
under their noses whenever they could, and often not from greed, but rather on
principle. No, they treated me with special favor; I cannot give much detailed proof of
this, but I have a firm conviction that it was so. Was it my questions, then, that pleased
them, and that they regarded as so clever? No, my questions did not please them and
were generally looked on as stupid. And yet it could only have been my questions that
won me their attention. It was as if they would rather do the impossible, that is, stop
my mouth with food -- they did not do it, but they would have liked to do it -- than
$ 320
endure my questions. But in that case they would have done better to drive me away
and refuse to listen to my questions. No, they did not want to do that; they did not
indeed want to listen to my questions, but it was because I asked these questions that
they did not want to drive me away. That was the time -- much as I was ridiculed and
treated as a silly puppy, and pushed here and pushed there -- the time when I actually
enjoyed most public esteem; never again was I to enjoy anything like it; I had free entry
everywhere, no obstacle was put in my way, I was actually flattered, though the flattery
was disguised as rudeness. And all really because of my questions, my impatience, my
thirst for knowledge. Did they want to lull me to sleep, to divert me, without violence,
almost lovingly, from a false path, yet a path whose falseness was not so completely
beyond all doubt that violence was permissible? Also a certain respect and fear kept
them from employing violence. I divined even in those days something of this; today I
know it quite well, far better than those who actually practiced it at the time: what
they wanted to do was really to divert me from my path. They did not succeed; they
achieved the opposite; my vigilance was sharpened. More, it became clear to me that it
was I who was trying to seduce the others, and that I was actually successful up to a
certain point. Only with the assistance of the whole dog world could I begin to
understand my own questions. For instance when I asked: "Whence does the earth
procure this food?" was I troubled, as appearances might quite well indicate, about the
earth; was I troubled about the labors of the earth? Not in the least; that, as I very soon
recognized, was far from my mind; all that I cared for was the race of dogs, that and
nothing else. For what is there actually except our own species? To whom but it can
one appeal in the wide and empty world? All knowledge, the totality of all questions
and all answers, is contained in the dog. If one could but realize this knowledge, if one
could but bring it into the light of day, if we dogs would but own that we know
infinitely more than we admit to ourselves! Even the most loquacious dog is more
secretive of his knowledge than the places where good food can be found. Trembling
with desire, whipping yourself with your own tail, you steal cautiously upon your
fellow dog, you ask, you beg, you howl, you bite, and achieve -- and achieve what you
could have achieved just as well without any effort: amiable attention, friendly
$ 321
contiguity, honest acceptance, ardent embraces, barks that mingle as one: everything
is directed toward achieving an ecstasy, a forgetting and finding again; but the one
thing that you long to win above all, the admission of knowledge, remains denied to
you. To such prayers, whether silent or loud, the only answers you get, even after you
have employed your powers of seduction to the utmost, are vacant stares, averted
glances, troubled and veiled eyes. It is much the same as it was when, a mere puppy, I
shouted to the dog musicians and they remained silent.
 Now one might say: "You complain about your fellow dogs, about their silence
on crucial questions; you assert that they know more than they admit, more than they
will allow to be valid, and that this silence, the mysterious reason for which is also, of
course, tacitly concealed, poisons existence and makes it unendurable for you, so that
you must either alter it or have done with it; that may be; but you are yourself a dog,
you have also the dog knowledge; well, bring it out, not merely in the form of a
question, but as an answer. If you utter it, who will think of opposing you? The great
choir of dogdom will join in as if it had been waiting for you. Then you will have
clarity, truth, avowal, as much of them as you desire. The roof of this wretched life, of
which you say so many hard things, will burst open, and all of us, shoulder to shoulder,
will ascend into the lofty realm of freedom. And if we should not achieve that final
consummation, if things should become worse than before, if the whole truth should
be more insupportable than the half-truth, if it should be proved that the silent are in
the right as the guardians of existence, if the faint hope that we still possess should
give way to complete hopelessness, the attempt is still worth the trial, since you do not
desire to live as you are compelled to live. Well, then, why do you make it a reproach
against the others that they are silent, and remain silent yourself?" Easy to answer:
Because I am a dog; in essentials just as locked in silence as the others, stubbornly
resisting my own questions, dour out of fear. To be precise, is it in the hope that they
might answer me that I have questioned my fellow dogs, at least since my adult years?
Have I any such foolish hope? Can I contemplate the foundations of our existence,
divine their profundity, watch the labor of their construction, that dark labor, and
$ 322
expect all this to be forsaken, neglected, undone, simply because I ask a question? No,
that I truly expect no longer. I understand my fellow dogs, am flesh of their flesh, of
their miserable, ever-renewed, ever-desirous flesh. But it is not merely flesh and blood
that we have in common, but knowledge also, and not only knowledge, but the key to
it as well. I do not possess that key except in common with all the others; I cannot
grasp it without their help. The hardest bones, containing the richest marrow, can be
conquered only by a united crunching of all the teeth of all dogs. That of course is only
a figure of speech and exaggerated; if all teeth were but ready they would not need
even to bite, the bones would crack themselves and the marrow would be freely
accessible to the feeblest of dogs. If I remain faithful to this metaphor, then the goal of
my aims, my questions, my inquiries, appears monstrous, it is true. For I want to
compel all dogs thus to assemble together, I want the bones to crack open under the
pressure of their collective preparedness, and then I want to dismiss them to the
ordinary life that they love, while all by myself, quite alone, I lap up the marrow. That
sounds monstrous, almost as if I wanted to feed on the marrow, not merely of a bone,
but of the whole canine race itself. But it is only a metaphor. The marrow that I am
discussing here is no food; on the contrary, it is a poison.
 My questions only serve as a goad to myself; I only want to be stimulated by the
silence which rises up around me as the ultimate answer. "How long will you be able to
endure the fact that the world of dogs, as your researches make more and more
evident, is pledged to silence and always will be? How long will you be able to endure
it?" That is the real great question of my life, before which all smaller ones sink into
insignificance; it is put to myself alone and concerns no one else. Unfortunately I can
answer it more easily than the smaller, specific questions: I shall probably hold out till
my natural end; the calm of old age will put up a greater and greater resistance to all
disturbing questions. I shall very likely die in silence and surrounded by silence, indeed
almost peacefully, and I look forward to that with composure. An admirably strong
heart, lungs that it is impossible to use up before their time, have been given to us dogs
as if in malice; we survive all questions, even our own, bulwarks of silence that we are.
$ 323
 Recently I have taken more and more to casting up my life, looking for the
decisive, the fundamental, error that I must surely have made; and I cannot find it.
And yet I must have made it, for if I had not made it and yet were unable by the
diligent labor of a long life to achieve my desire, that would prove that my desire is
impossible, and complete hopelessness must follow. Behold, then, the work of a
lifetime. First of all my inquiries into the question: Whence does the earth procure the
food it gives us? A young dog, at bottom naturally greedy for life, I renounced all
enjoyments, apprehensively avoided all pleasures, buried my head between my front
paws when I was confronted by temptation, and addressed myself to my task. I was no
scholar, neither in the information I acquired, nor in method, nor in intention. That
was probably a defect, but it could not have been a decisive one. I had had little
schooling, for I left my mother's care at an early age, soon got used to independence,
led a free life; and premature independence is inimical to systematic learning. But I
have seen much, listened to much, spoken with dogs of all sorts and conditions,
understood everything, I believe, fairly intelligently, and correlated my particular
observations fairly intelligently; that has compensated somewhat for my lack of
scholarship, not to mention that independence, if it is a disadvantage in learning
things, is an actual advantage when one is making one's own inquiries. In my case it
was all the more necessary as I was not able to employ the real method of science, to
avail myself, that is, of the labors of my predecessors, and establish contact with
contemporary investigators. I was entirely cast on my own resources, began at the very
beginning, and with the consciousness, inspiriting to youth, but utterly crushing to
age, that the fortuitous point to which I carried my labors must also be the final one.
Was I really so alone in my inquiries, at the beginning and up to now? Yes and no. It is
inconceivable that there must not always have been and that there are not today
individual dogs in the same case as myself. I cannot be so accursed as that. I do not
deviate from the dog nature by a hairbreadth. Every dog has like me the impulse to
question, and I have like every dog the impulse not to answer. Everyone has the
impulse to question. How otherwise could my questions have affected my hearers in
the slightest -- and they were often affected, to my ecstatic delight, an exaggerated
$ 324
delight, I must confess -- and how otherwise could I have been prevented from
achieving much more than I have done? And that I have the compulsion to remain
silent needs unfortunately no particular proof. I am at bottom, then, no different from
any other dog; everybody, no matter how he may differ in opinion from me and reject
my views, will gladly admit that, and I in turn will admit as much of any other dog.
Only the mixture of the elements is different, a difference very important for the
individual, insignificant for the race. And now can one credit that the composition of
these available elements has never chanced through all the past and present to result
in a mixture similar to mine, one, moreover, if mine be regarded as unfortunate, more
unfortunate still? To think so would be contrary to all experience. We dogs are all
engaged in the strangest occupations, occupations in which one would refuse to
believe if one had not the most reliable information concerning them. The best
example that I can quote is that of the soaring dog. The first time I heard of one I
laughed and simply refused to believe it. What? One was asked to believe that there
was a very tiny species of dog, not much bigger than my head even when it was full
grown, and this dog, who must of course be a feeble creature, an artificial, weedy,
brushed and curled fop by all accounts, incapable of making an honest jump, this dog
was supposed, according to people's stories, to remain for the most part high up in the
air, apparently doing nothing at all but simply resting there? No, to try to make me
swallow such things was exploiting the simplicity of a young dog too outrageously, I
told myself. But shortly afterwards I heard from another source an account of another
soaring dog. Could there be a conspiracy to fool me? But after that I saw the dog
musicians with my own eyes, and from that day I considered everything possible, no
prejudices fettered my powers of apprehension, I investigated the most senseless
rumors, following them as far as they could take me, and the most senseless seemed to
me in this senseless world more probable than the sensible, and moreover particularly
fertile for investigation. So it was too with the soaring dogs. I discovered a great many
things about them; true, I have succeeded to this day in seeing none of them, but of
their existence I have been firmly convinced for a long time, and they occupy an
important place in my picture of the world. As usual, it is not, of course, their
$ 325
technique that chiefly gives me to think. It is wonderful -- who can gainsay it? -- that
these dogs should be able to float in the air: in my amazed admiration for that I am at
one with my fellow dogs. But far more strange to my mind is the senselessness, the
dumb senselessness of these existences. They have no relation whatever to the general
life of the community, they hover in the air, and that is all, and life goes on its usual
way; someone now and then refers to art and artists, but there it ends. But why, my
good dogs, why on earth do these dogs float in the air? What sense is there in their
occupation? Why can one get no word of explanation regarding them? Why do they
hover up there, letting their legs, the pride of dogs, fall into desuetude, preserving a
detachment from the nourishing earth, reaping without having sowed, being
particularly well provided for, as I hear, and at the cost of the dog community too. I
can flatter myself that my inquiries into these matters made some stir. People began to
investigate after a fashion, to collect data; they made a beginning, at least, although
they are never likely to go farther. But after all that is sornething. And though the
truth will not be discovered by such means -- never can that stage be reached -- yet
they throw light on some of the profounder ramifications of falsehood. For all the
senseless phenomena of our existence, and the most senseless most of all, are
susceptible to investigation. Not completely, of course -- that is the diabolical jest --
but sufficiently to spare one painful questions. Take the soaring dogs once more as an
example; they are not haughty as one might imagine at first, but rather particularly
dependent upon their fellow dogs; if one tries to put oneself in their place one will see
that. For they must do what they can to obtain pardon, and not openly -- that would
be a violation of the obligation to keep silence -- they must do what they can to obtain
pardon for their way of life, or else divert attention from it so that it may be forgotten -
- and they do this, I have been told, by means of an almost unendurable volubility.
They are perpetually talking, partly of their philosophical reflections, with which,
seeing that they have completely renounced bodily exertion, they can continuously
occupy themselves, partly of the observations which they have made from their
exalted stations; and although, as is very understandable considering their lazy
existence, they are not much distinguished for intellectual power, and their philosophy
$ 326
is as worthless as their observations, and science can make hardly any use of their
utterances, and besides is not reduced to draw assistance from such wretched sources,
nevertheless if one asks what the soaring dogs are really doing one will invariably
receive the reply that they contribute a great deal to knowledge. "That is true," remarks
someone, "but their contributions are worthless and wearisome." The reply to that is a
shrug, or a change of the subject, or annoyance, or laughter, and in a little while, when
you ask again, you learn once more that they contribute to knowledge, and finally
when you are asked the question you yourself will reply -- if you are not careful -- to
the same effect. And perhaps indeed it is well not to be too obstinate, but to yield to
public sentiment, to accept the extant soaring dogs, and without recognizing their
right to existence, which cannot be done, yet to tolerate them. But more than this
must not be required; that would be going too far, and yet the demand is made. We
are perpetually being asked to put up with new soaring dogs who are always appearing.
One does not even know where they come from. Do these dogs multiply by
propagation? Have they actually the strength for that? -- for they are nothing much
more than a beautiful coat of hair, and what is there in that to propagate? But even if
that improbable contingency were possible, when could it take place? For they are
invariably seen alone, self-complacently floating high up in the air, and if once in a
while they descend to take a run, it lasts only for a minute or two, a few mincing struts
and also always in strict solitude, absorbed in what is supposed to be profound
thought, from which, even when they exert themselves to the utmost, they cannot tear
themselves free, or at least so they say. But if they do not propagate their kind, is it
credible that there can be dogs who voluntarily give up life on the solid ground,
voluntarily become soaring dogs, and merely for the sake of the comfort and a certain
technical accomplishment choose that empty life on cushions up there? It is
unthinkable; neither propagation nor voluntary transition is thinkable. The facts,
however, show that there are always new soaring dogs in evidence; from which one
must conclude that, in spite of obstacles which appear insurmountable to our
understanding, no dog species, however curious, ever dies out, once it exists, or, at
least, not without a tough struggle, not without being capable of putting up a
$ 327
successful defense for a long time.
 But if that is valid for such an out-of-the-way, externally odd, inefficient species
as the soaring dog, must I not also accept it as valid for mine? Besides, I am not in the
least queer outwardly; an ordinary middle-class dog such as is very prevalent, in this
neighborhood, at least, I am neither particularly exceptional in any way, nor
particularly repellent in any way; and in nay youth and to some extent also in maturity,
so long as I attended to my appearance and had lots of exercise, I was actually
considered a very handsome dog. My front view was particularly admired, my slim
legs, the fine set of my head; but my silvery white and yellow coat, which curled only at
the hair tips, was very pleasing too; in all that there was nothing strange; the only
strange thing about me is my nature, yet even that, as I am always careful to
remember, has its foundation in universal dog nature. Now if not even the soaring
dogs live in isolation, but invariably manage to encounter their fellows somewhere or
other in the great dog world, and even to conjure new generations of themselves out of
nothingness, then I too can live in the confidence that I am not quite forlorn. Certainly
the fate of types like mine must be a strange one, and the existence of my colleagues
can never be of visible help to me, if for no other reason than that I should scarcely
ever be able to recognize them. We are the dogs who are crushed by the silence, who
long to break through it, literally to get a breath of fresh air; the others seem to thrive
on silence: true, that is only so in appearance, as in the case of the musical dogs, who
ostensibly were quite calm when they played, but in reality were in a state of intense
excitement; nevertheless the illusion is very strong, one tries to make a breach in it,
but it mocks every attempt. What help, then, do my colleagues find? What kind of
attempts do they make to manage to go on living in spite of everything? These
attempts may be of various kinds. My own bout of questioning while I was young was
one. So I thought that perhaps if I associated with those who asked many questions I
might find my real comrades. Well, I did so for some time, with great self-control, a
self-control made necessary by the annoyance I felt when I was interrupted by
perpetual questions that I mostly could not answer myself: for the only thing that
$ 328
concerns me is to obtain answers. Moreover, who but is eager to ask questions when
he is young, and how, when so many questions are going about, are you to pick out the
right questions? One question sounds like another; it is the intention that counts, but
that is often hidden even from the questioner. And besides, it is a peculiarity of dogs to
be always asking questions, they ask them confusedly all together; it is as if in doing
that they were trying to obliterate every trace of the genuine questions. No, my real
colleagues are not to be found among the youthful questioners, and just as little
among the old and silent, to whom I now belong. But what good are all these
questions, for they have failed me completely; apparently my colleagues are cleverer
dogs than I, and have recourse to other excellent methods that enable them to bear
this life, methods which, nevertheless, as I can tell from my own experience, though
they may perhaps help at a pinch, though they may calm, lull to rest, distract, are yet
on the whole as impotent as my own, for, no matter where I look, I can see no sign of
their success. I am afraid that the last thing by which I can hope to recognize my real
colleagues is their success. But where, then, are my real colleagues? Yes, that is the
burden of my complaint; that is the kernel of it. Where are they? Everywhere and
nowhere. Perhaps my next-door neighbor, only three jumps away, is one of them; we
often bark across to each other, he calls on me sometimes too, though I do not call on
him. Is he my real colleague? I do not know, I certainly see no sign of it in him, but it is
possible. It is possible, but all the same nothing is more improbable. When he is away I
can amuse myself, drawing on my fancy, by discovering in him many things that have
a suspicious resemblance to myself; but once he stands before me all my fancies
become ridiculous. An old dog, a little smaller even than myself -- and I am hardly
medium size -- brown, short-haired, with a tired hang of the head and a shuffling gait;
on top of all this he trails his left hind leg behind him a little because of some disease.
For a long time now I have been more intimate with him than with anybody else; I am
glad to say that I can still get on tolerably well with him, and when he goes away I
shout the most friendly greetings after him, though not out of affection, but in anger at
myself; for if I follow him I find him just as disgusting again, slinking along there with
his trailing leg and his much too low hindquarters. Sometimes it seems to me as if I
$ 329
were trying to humiliate myself by thinking of him as my colleague. Nor in our talks
does he betray any trace of similarity of thought; true, he is clever and cultured enough
as these things go here, and I could learn much from him; but is it for cleverness and
culture that I am looking? We converse usually about local questions, and I am
astonished -- my isolation has made me more clear-sighted in such matters -- how
much intelligence is needed even by an ordinary dog even in average and not
unfavorable circumstances, if he is to live out his life and defend himself against the
greater of life's customary dangers. True, knowledge provides the rules one must
follow, but even to grasp them imperfectly and in rough outline is by no means easy,
and when one has actually grasped them the real difficulty still remains, namely to
apply them to local conditions -- here almost nobody can help, almost every hour
brings new tasks, and every new patch of earth its specific problems; no one can
maintain that he has settled everything for good and that henceforth his life will go on,
so to speak, of itself, not even I myself, though my needs shrink literally from day to
day. And all this ceaseless labor -- to what end? Merely to entomb oneself deeper and
deeper in silence, it seems, so deep that one can never be dragged out of it again by
anybody.
 People often praise the universal progress made by the dog community
throughout the ages, and probably mean by that more particularly the progress in
knowledge. Certainly knowledge is progressing, its advance is irresistible, it actually
progresses at an accelerating speed, always faster, but what is there to praise in that? It
is as if one were to praise someone because with the years he grows older, and in
consequence comes nearer and nearer to death with increasing speed. That is a
natural and moreover an ugly process, in which I find nothing to praise. I can only see
decline everywhere, in saying which, however, I do not mean that earlier generations
were essentially better than ours, but only younger; that was their great advantage,
their memory was not so overburdened as ours today, it was easier to get them to
speak out, and even if nobody actually succeeded in doing that, the possibility of it was
greater, and it is indeed this greater sense of possibility that moves us so deeply when
$ 330
we listen to those old and strangely simple stories. Here and there we catch a curiously
significant phrase and we would almost like to leap to our feet, if we did not feel the
weight of centuries upon us. No, whatever objection I may have to my age, former
generations were not better, indeed in a sense they were far worse, far weaker. Even in
those days wonders did not openly walk the streets for anyone to seize; but all the
same, dogs -- I cannot put it in any other way -- had not yet become so doggish as
today, the edifice of dogdom was still loosely put together, the true Word could still
have intervened, planning or replanning the structure, changing it at will,
transforming it into its opposite; and the Word was there, was very near at least, on
the tip of everybody's tongue, anyone might have hit upon it. And what has become of
it today? Today one may pluck out one's very heart and not find it. Our generation is
lost, it may be, but it is more blameless than those earlier ones. I can understand the
hesitation of my generation, indeed it is no longer mere hesitation; it is the thousandth
forgetting of a dream dreamt a thousand times and forgotten a thousand times; and
who can damn us merely for forgetting for the thousandth time? But I fancy I
understand the hesitation of our forefathers too, we would probably have acted just as
they did; indeed I could almost say: well for us that it was not we who had to take the
guilt upon us, that instead we can hasten in almost guiltless silence toward death in a
world darkened by others. When our first fathers strayed they had doubtless scarcely
any notion that their aberration was to be an endless one, they could still literally see
the crossroads, it seemed an easy matter to turn back whenever they pleased, and if
they hesitated to turn back it was merely because they wanted to enjoy a dog's life for a
little while longer; it was not yet a genuine dog's life, and already it seemed
intoxicatingly beautiful to them, so what must it become in a little while, a very little
while, and so they strayed farther. They did not know what we can now guess at,
contemplating the course of history: that change begins in the soul before it appears in
ordinary existence, and that, when they began to enjoy a dog's life, they must already
have possessed real old dogs' souls, and were by no means so near their starting point
as they thought, or as their eyes feasting on all doggish joys tried to persuade them.
But who can still speak of youth today? These were the really young dogs, but their
$ 331
sole ambition unfortunately was to become old dogs, truly a thing which they could
not fail to achieve, as all succeeding generations show, and ours, the last, most clearly
of all.
 Naturally I do not talk to my neighbor of these things, but often I cannot but
think of them when I am sitting opposite him -- that typical old dog -- or bury my
nose in his coat, which already has a whiff of the smell of cast-off hides. To talk to him,
or even to any of the others, about such things would be pointless. I know what course
the conversation would take. He would urge a slight objection now and then, but
finally he would agree -- agreement is the best weapon of defense -- and the matter
would be buried: why indeed trouble to exhume it at all? And in spite of this there is a
profounder understanding between my neighbor and me, going deeper than mere
words. I shall never cease to maintain that, though I have no proof of it and perhaps
am merely suffering from an ordinary delusion, caused by the fact that for a long time
this dog has been the only one with whom I have held any communication, and so I
am bound to cling to him. "Are you after all my colleague in your own fashion? And
ashamed because everything has miscarried with you? Look, the same fate has been
mine. When I am alone I weep over it; come, it is sweeter to weep in company." I often
have such thoughts as these and then I give him a prolonged look. He does not lower
his glance, but neither can one read anything from it; he gazes at me dully, wondering
why I am silent and why I have broken off the conversation. But perhaps that very
glance is his way of questioning me, and I disappoint him just as he disappoints me. In
my youth, if other problems had not been more important to me then, and I had not
been perfectly satisfied with my own company, I would probably have asked him
straight out and received an answer flatly agreeing with me, and that would have been
worse even than today's silence. But is not everybody silent exactly in the same way?
What is there to prevent me from believing that everyone is my colleague, instead of
thinking that I have only one or two fellow inquirers -- lost and forgotten along with
their petty achievements, so that I can never reach them by any road through the
darkness of ages or the confused throng of the present: why not believe that all dogs
$ 332
from the beginning of time have been my colleagues, all diligent in their own way, all
unsuccessful in their own way, all silent or falsely garrulous in their own way, as
hopeless research is apt to make one? But in that case I need not have severed myself
from my fellows at all, I could have remained quietly among the others, I had no need
to fight my way out like a stubborn child through the closed ranks of the grownups,
who indeed wanted as much as I to find a way out, and who seemed incomprehensible
to me simply because of their knowledge, which told them that nobody could ever
escape and that it was stupid to use force.
 Such ideas, however, are definitely due to the influence of my neighbor; he
confuses me, he fills me with dejection; and yet in himself he is happy enough, at least
when he is in his own quarters I often hear him shouting and singing; it is really
unbearable. It would be a good thing to renounce this last tie also, to cease giving way
to the vague dreams which all contact with dogs unavoidably provokes, no matter how
hardened one may consider oneself, and to employ the short time that still remains for
me exclusively in prosecuting my researches. The next time he comes I shall slip away,
or pretend I am asleep, and keep up the pretense until he stops visiting me.
 Also my researches have fallen into desuetude, I relax, I grow weary, I trot
mechanically where once I raced enthusiastically. I think of the time when I began to
inquire into the question: "Whence does the earth procure this food?" Then indeed I
really lived among the people, I pushed my way where the crowd was thickest, wanted
everybody to know my work and be my audience, and my audience was even more
essential to me than my work; I still expected to produce some effect or other, and that
naturally gave me a great impetus, which now that I am solitary is gone. But in those
days I was so full of strength that I achieved something unprecedented, something at
variance with all our principles, and that every contemporary eyewitness assuredly
recalls now as an uncanny feat. Our scientific knowledge, which generally makes for
an extreme specialization, is remarkably simple in one province. I mean where it
teaches that the earth engenders our food, and then, after having laid down this
$ 333
hypothesis, gives the methods by which the different foods may be achieved in their
best kinds and greatest abundance. Now it is of course true that the earth brings forth
all food, of that there can be no doubt; but as simple as people generally imagine it to
be the matter is not; and their belief that it is simple prevents further inquiry. Take an
ordinary occurrence that happens every day. If we were to be quite inactive, as I am
almost completely now, and after a perfunctory scratching and watering of the soil lay
down and waited for what was to come, then we should find the food on the ground,
assuming, that is, that a result of some kind is inevitable. Nevertheless that is not what
usually happens. Those who have preserved even a little freedom of judgment on
scientific matters -- and their numbers are truly small, for science draws a wider and
wider circle around itself -- will easily see, without having to make any specific
experiment, that the main part of the food that is discovered on the ground in such
cases comes from above; indeed customarily we snap up most of our food, according
to our dexterity and greed, before it has reached the ground at all. In saying that,
however, I am saying nothing against science; the earth, of course, brings forth this
kind of food too. Whether the earth draws one kind of food out of itself and calls down
another kind from the skies perhaps makes no essential difference, and science, which
has established that in both cases it is necessary to prepare the ground, need not
perhaps concern itself with such distinctions, for does it not say: "If you have food in
your jaws you have solved all questions for the time being." But it seems to me that
science nevertheless takes a veiled interest, at least to some extent, in these matters,
inasmuch as it recognizes two chief methods of procuring food; namely the actual
preparation of the ground, and secondly the auxiliary perfecting processes of
incantation, dance, and song. I find here a distinction in accordance with the one I
have myself made; not a definitive distinction, perhaps, but yet clear enough. The
scratching and watering of the ground, in my opinion, serves to produce both kinds of
food, and remains indispensable; incantation, dance, and song, however, are
concerned less with the ground food in the narrower sense, and serve principally to
attract the food from above. Tradition fortifies me in this interpretation. The ordinary
dogs themselves set science right here without knowing it, and without science being
$ 334
able to venture a word in reply. If, as science claims, these ceremonies minister only to
the soil, giving it the potency, let us say, to attract food from the air, then logically they
should be directed exclusively to the soil; it is the soil that the incantations must be
whispered to, the soil that must be danced to. And to the best of my knowledge
science ordains nothing else than this. But now comes the remarkable thing; the
people in all their ceremonies gaze upwards. This is no insult to science, since science
does not forbid it, but leaves the husbandman complete freedom in this respect; in its
teaching it takes only the soil into account, and if the husbandman carries out its
instructions concerning the preparation of the ground it is content; yet, in my opinion,
it should really demand more than this if it is logical. And, though I have never been
deeply initiated into science, I simply cannot conceive how the learned can bear to let
our people, unruly and passionate as they are, chant their incantations with their faces
turned upwards, wail our ancient folk songs into the air, and spring high in their
dances as though, forgetting the ground, they wished to take flight from it forever. I
took this contradiction as my starting point, and whenever, according to the teachings
of science, the harvest time was approaching, I restricted my attention to the ground,
it was the ground that I scratched in the dance, and I almost gave myself a crick in the
neck keeping my head as close to the ground as I could. Later I dug a hole for my nose,
and sang and declaimed into it so that only the ground might hear, and nobody else
beside or above me.
 The results of my experiment were meager. Sometimes the food did not
appear, and I was already preparing to rejoice at this proof, but then the food would
appear; it was exactly as if my strange performance had caused some confusion at first,
but had shown itself later to possess advantages, so that in my case the usual barking
and leaping could be dispensed with. Often, indeed, the food appeared in greater
abundance than formerly, but then again it would stay away altogether. With a
diligence hitherto unknown in a young dog I drew up exact reports of all my
experiments, fancied that here and there I was on a scent that might lead me further,
but then it lost itself again in obscurity. My inadequate grounding in science also
$ 335
undoubtedly held me up here. What guarantee had I, for instance, that the absence of
the food was not caused by unscientific preparation of the ground rather than by my
experiments, and if that should be so, then all my conclusions were invalid. In certain
circumstances I might have been able to achieve an almost scrupulously exact
experiment; namely, if I had succeeded only once in bringing down food by an upward
incantation without preparing the ground at all, and then had failed to extract food by
an incantation directed exclusively to the ground. I attempted indeed something of
this kind, but without any real belief in it and without the conditions being quite
perfect; for it is my fixed opinion that a certain amount of ground-preparation is
always necessary, and even if the heretics who deny this are right, their theory can
never be proved in any case, seeing that the watering of the ground is done under a
kind of compulsion, and within certain limits simply cannot be avoided. Another and
somewhat tangential experiment succeeded better and aroused some public attention.
Arguing from the customary method of snatching food while still in the air, I decided
to allow the food to fall to the ground, but to make no effort to snatch it. Accordingly I
always made a small jump in the air when the food appeared, but timed it so that it
might always fail of its object; in the majority of instances the food fell dully and
indifferently to the ground in spite of this, and I flung myself furiously upon it, with
the fury both of hunger and of disappointment. But in isolated cases something else
happened, something really strange; the food did not fall but followed me through the
air; the food pursued the hungry. That never went on for long, always for only a short
stretch, then the food fell after all, or vanished completely, or -- the most common
case -- my greed put a premature end to the experiment and I swallowed down the
tempting food. All the same I was happy at that time, a stir of curiosity ran through my
neighborhood, I attracted uneasy attention, I found my acquaintances more accessible
to my questions, I could see in their eyes a gleam that seemed like an appeal for help;
and even if it was only the reflection of my own glance I asked for nothing more. I was
satisfied. Until at last I discovered -- and the others discovered it simultaneously --
that this experiment of mine was a commonplace of science, had already succeeded
with others far more brilliantly than with me, and though it had not been attempted
$ 336
for a long time on account of the extreme self-control it required, had also no need to
be repeated, for scientifically it had no value at all. It only proved what was already
known, that the ground not only attracts food vertically from above, but also at a slant,
indeed sometimes in spirals. So there I was left with my experiment, but I was not
discouraged, I was too young for that; on the contrary, this disappointment braced me
to attempt perhaps the greatest achievement of my life. I did not believe the scientists'
depreciations of my experiment, yet belief was of no avail here, but only proof, and I
resolved to set about establishing that and thus raise my experiment from its original
irrelevance and set it in the very center of the field of research. I wished to prove that
when I retreated before the food it was not the ground that attracted it at a slant, but I
who drew it after me. This first experiment, it is true, I could not carry any farther; to
see the food before one and experiment in a scientific spirit at the same time -- one
cannot keep that up indefinitely. But I decided to do something else; I resolved to fast
completely as long as I could stand it, and at the same time avoid all sight of food, all
temptation. If I were to withdraw myself in this manner, remain lying day and night
with closed eyes, trouble myself neither to snatch food from the air nor to lift it from
the ground, and if, as I dared not expect, yet faintly hoped, without taking any of the
customary measures, and merely in response to the unavoidable irrational watering of
the ground and the quiet recitation of the incantations and songs (the dance I wished
to omit, so as not to weaken my powers) the food were to come of itself from above,
and without going near the ground were to knock at my teeth for admittance -- if that
were to happen, then, even if science was not confuted, for it has enough elasticity to
admit exceptions and isolated cases -- I asked myself what would the other dogs say,
who fortunately do not possess such extreme elasticity? For this would be no
exceptional case like those handed down by history, such as the incident, let us say, of
the dog who refuses, because of bodily illness or trouble of mind, to prepare the
ground, to track down and seize his food, upon which the whole dog community recite
magical formulae and by this means succeed in making the food deviate from its
customary route into the jaws of the invalid. I, on the contrary, was perfectly sound
and at the height of my powers, my appetite so splendid that it prevented me all day
$ 337
from thinking of anything but itself; I submitted, moreover, whether it be credited or
not, voluntarily to my period of fasting, was myself quite able to conjure down my own
supply of food and wished also to do so, and so I asked no assistance from the dog
community, and indeed rejected it in the most determined manner.
 I sought a suitable place for myself in an outlying clump of bushes, where I
would have to listen to no talk of food, no sound of munching jaws and bones being
gnawed; I ate my fill for the last time and laid me down. As far as possible I wanted to
pass my whole time with closed eyes; until the food came it would be perpetual night
for me, even though my vigil might last for days or weeks. During that time, however, I
dared not sleep much, better indeed if I did not sleep at all -- and that made
everything much harder -- for I must not only conjure the food down from the air, but
also be on my guard lest I should be asleep when it arrived; yet on the other hand sleep
would be very welcome to me, for I would manage to fast much longer asleep than
awake. For those reasons I decided to arrange my time prudently and sleep a great
deal, but always in short snatches. I achieved this by always resting my head while I
slept on some frail twig, which soon snapped and so awoke me. So there I lay, sleeping
or keeping watch, dreaming or singing quietly to myself. My first vigils passed
uneventfully; perhaps in the place whence the food came no one had yet noticed that I
was lying there in resistance to the normal course of things, and so there was no sign. I
was a little disturbed in my concentration by the fear that the other dogs might miss
me, presently find me, and attempt something or other against me. A second fear was
that at the mere wetting of the ground, though it was unfruitful ground according to
the findings of science, some chance nourishment might appear and seduce me by its
smell. But for a time nothing of that kind happened and I could go on fasting. Apart
from such fears I was more calm during this first stage than I could remember ever
having been before. Although in reality I was laboring to annul the findings of science,
I felt within me a deep reassurance, indeed almost the proverbial serenity of the
scientific worker. In my thoughts I begged forgiveness of science; there must be room
in it for my researches too; consolingly in my ears rang the assurance that no matter
$ 338
how great the effect of my inquiries might be, and indeed the greater the better, I
would not be lost to ordinary dog life; science regarded my attempts with benevolence,
it itself would undertake the interpretation of my discoveries, and that promise already
meant fulfillment; while until now I had felt outlawed in my innermost heart and had
run my head against the traditional walls of my species like a savage, I would now be
accepted with great honor, the long-yearned-for warmth of assembled canine bodies
would lap around me, I would ride uplifted high on the shoulders of my fellows.
Remarkable effects of my first hunger. My achievement seemed so great to me that I
began to weep with emotion and self-pity there among the quiet bushes, which it must
be confessed was not very understandable, for when I was looking forward to my wellearned reward why should I weep? Probably out of pure happiness. It is always when I
am happy, and that is seldom enough, that I weep. After that, however, these feelings
soon passed. My beautiful fancies fled one by one before the increasing urgency of my
hunger; a little longer and I was, after an abrupt farewell to all my imaginations and
my sublime feelings, totally alone with the hunger burning in my entrails. "That is my
hunger," I told myself countless times during this stage, as if I wanted to convince
myself that my hunger and I were still two things and I could shake it off like a
burdensome lover; but in reality we were very painfully one, and when I explained to
myself: "That is my hunger," it was really my hunger that was speaking and having its
joke at my expense. A bad, bad time! I still shudder to think of it, and not merely on
account of the suffering I endured then, but mainly because I was unable to finish it
then and consequently shall have to live through that suffering once more if I am ever
to achieve anything; for today I still hold fasting to be the final and most potent means
of my research. The way goes through fasting; the highest, if it is attainable, is
attainable only by the highest effort, and the highest effort among us is voluntary
fasting. So when I think of those times -- and I would gladly pass my life in brooding
over them -- I cannot help thinking also of the time that still threatens me. It seems to
me that it takes almost a lifetime to recuperate from such an attempt; my whole life as
an adult lies between me and that fast, and I have not recovered yet. When I begin
upon my next fast I shall perhaps have more resolution than the first time, because of
$ 339
my greater experience and deeper insight into the need for the attempt, but my
powers are still enfeebled by that first essay, and so I shall probably begin to fail at the
mere approach of these familiar horrors. My weaker appetite will not help me; it will
only reduce the value of the attempt a little, and will, indeed, probably force me to fast
longer than would have been necessary the first time. I think I am clear on these and
many other matters, the long interval has not been wanting in trial attempts, often
enough I have literally got my teeth into hunger; but I was still not strong enough for
the ultimate effort, and now the unspoiled ardor of youth is of course gone forever. It
vanished in the great privations of that first fast. All sorts of thoughts tormented me.
Our forefathers appeared threateningly before me. True, I held them responsible for
everything, even if I dared not say so openly; it was they who involved our dog life in
guilt, and so I could easily have responded to their menaces with countermenaces; but
I bow before their knowledge, it came from sources of which we know no longer, and
for that reason, much as I may feel compelled to oppose them, I shall never actually
overstep their laws, but content myself with wriggling out through the gaps, for which
I have a particularly good nose. On the question of fasting I appealed to the wellknown dialogue in the course of which one of our sages once expressed the intention
of forbidding fasting, but was dissuaded by a second with the words: "But who would
ever think of fasting?" whereupon the first sage allowed himself to be persuaded and
withdrew the prohibition. But now arises the question: "Is not fasting really forbidden
after all?" The great majority of commentators deny this and regard fasting as freely
permitted, and holding as they think with the second sage do not worry in the least
about the evil consequences that may result from erroneous interpretations. I had
naturally assured myself on this point before I began my fast. But now that I was
twisted with the pangs of hunger, and in my distress of mind sought relief in my own
hind legs, despairingly licking and gnawing at them up to the very buttocks, the
universal interpretation of this dialogue seemed to me entirely and completely false, I
cursed the commentators' science, I cursed myself for having been led astray by it; for
the dialogue contained, as any child could see, more than merely one prohibition of
fasting; the first sage wished to forbid fasting; what a sage wishes is already done, so
$ 340
fasting was forbidden; as for the second sage, he not only agreed with the first, but
actually considered fasting impossible, piled therefore on the first prohibition a
second, that of dog nature itself; the first sage saw this and thereupon withdrew the
explicit prohibition, that was to say, he imposed upon all dogs, the matter being now
settled, the obligation to know themselves and to make their own prohibitions
regarding fasting. So here was a threefold prohibition instead of merely one, and I had
violated it. Now I could at least have obeyed at this point, though tardily, but in the
midst of my pain I felt a longing to go on fasting, and I followed it as greedily as if it
were a strange dog. I could not stop; perhaps too I was already too weak to get up and
seek safety for myself in familiar scenes. I tossed about on the fallen forest leaves, I
could no longer sleep, I heard noises on every side; the world, which had been asleep
during my life hitherto, seemed to have been awakened by my fasting, I was tortured
by the fancy that I would never be able to eat again, and I must eat so as to reduce to
silence this world rioting so noisily around me, and I would never be able to do so; but
the greatest noise of all came from my own belly, I often laid my ear against it with
startled eyes, for I could hardly believe what I heard. And now that things were
becoming unendurable my very nature seemed to be seized by the general frenzy, and
made senseless attempts to save itself; the smell of food began to assail me, delicious
dainties that I had long since forgotten, delights of my childhood; yes, I could smell the
very fragrance of my mother's teats; I forgot my resolution to resist all smells, or rather
I did not forget it; I dragged myself to and fro, never for more than a few yards, and
sniffed as if that were in accordance with my resolution, as if I were looking for food
simply to be on my guard against it. The fact that I found nothing did not disappoint
me; the food must be there, only it was always a few steps away, my legs failed me
before I could reach it. But simultaneously I knew that nothing was there, and that I
made those feeble movements simply out of fear lest I might collapse in this place and
never be able to leave it. My last hopes, my last dreams vanished; I would perish here
miserably; of what use were my researches? -- childish attempts undertaken in childish
and far happier days; here and now was the hour of deadly earnest, here my inquiries
should have shown their value, but where had they vanished? Only a dog lay here
$ 341
helplessly snapping at the empty air, a dog who, though he still watered the ground
with convulsive haste at short intervals and without being aware of it, could not
remember even the shortest of the countless incantations stored in his memory, not
even the little rhyme which the newly born puppy says when it snuggles under its
mother. It seemed to me as if I were separated from all my fellows, not by a quite short
stretch, but by an infinite distance, and as if I would die less of hunger than of neglect.
For it was clear that nobody troubled about me, nobody beneath the earth, on it, or
above it; I was dying of their indifference; they said indifferently. "He is dying," and it
would actually come to pass. And did I not myself assent? Did I not say the same
thing? Had I not wanted to be forsaken like this? Yes, brothers, but not so as to perish
in that place, but to achieve truth and escape from this world of falsehood, where there
is no one from whom you can learn the truth, not even from me, born as I am a citizen
of falsehood. Perhaps the truth was not so very far off, and I not so forsaken, therefore,
as I thought; or I may have been forsaken less by my fellows than by myself, in yielding
and consenting to die.
 But one does not die so easily as a nervous dog imagines. I merely fainted, and
when I came to and raised my eyes a strange hound was standing before me. I did not
feel hungry, but rather filled with strength, and my limbs, it seemed to me, were light
and agile, though I made no attempt to prove this by getting to my feet. My visual
faculties in themselves were no keener than usual; a beautiful but not at all
extraordinary hound stood before me; I could see that, and that was all, and yet it
seemed to me that I saw something more in him. There was blood under me, at first I
took it for food; but I recognized it immediately as blood that I had vomited. I turned
my eyes from it to the strange hound. He was lean, long-legged, brown with a patch of
white here and there, and had a fine, strong, piercing glance. "What are you doing
here?" he asked. "You must leave this place." "I can't leave it just now," I said, without
trying to explain, for how could I explain everything to him; besides, he seemed to be
in a hurry. "Please go away," he said, impatiently lifting his feet and setting them down
again. "Let me be," I said, "leave me to myself and don't worry about me; the others
$ 342
don't." "I ask you to go for your own sake," he said. "You can ask for any reason you
like," I replied. "I can't go even if I wanted to." "You need have no fear of that," he said,
smiling. "You can go all right. It's because you seem to be feeble that I ask you to go
now, and you can go slowly if you like; if you linger now you'll have to race off later
on." "That's my affair," I replied. "It's mine too," he said, saddened by my stubbornness,
yet obviously resolved to let me lie for the time being, but at the same time to seize the
opportunity of paying court to me. At any other time I would gladly have submitted to
the blandishments of such a beautiful creature, but at that moment, why, I cannot tell,
the thought filled me with terror. "Get out!" I screamed, and all the louder as I had no
other means of protecting myself. "All right, I'll leave you then," he said, slowly
retreating. "You're wonderful. Don't I please you?" "You'll please me by going away and
leaving me in peace," I said, but I was no longer so sure of myself as I tried to make
him think. My senses, sharpened by fasting, suddenly seemed to see or hear something
about him; it was just beginning, it was growing, it came nearer, and I knew that this
hound had the power to drive me away, even if I could not imagine to myself at the
moment how I was ever to get to my feet. And I gazed at him -- he had merely shaken
his head sadly at my rough answer -- with ever mounting desire. "Who are you?" I
asked. "I'm a hunter," he replied. "And why won't you let me lie here?" I asked. "You
disturb me," he said. "I can't hunt while you're here." "Try," I said, "perhaps you'll be
able to hunt after all." "No," he said, "I'm sorry, but you must go." "Don't hunt for this
one day!" I implored him. "No," he said, "I must hunt." "I must go; you must hunt," I
said, "nothing but musts. Can you explain to me why we must?" "No," he replied, "but
there's nothing that needs to be explained, these are natural, self-evident things." "Not
quite so self-evident as all that," I said, "you're sorry that you must drive me away, and
yet you do it." "That's so," he replied. "That's so," I echoed him crossly, "that isn't an
answer. Which sacrifice would you rather make: to give up your hunting, or give up
driving me away?" "To give up my hunting," he said without hesitation. "There!" said I,
"don't you see that you're contradicting yourself?" "How am I contradicting myself?" he
replied. "My dear little dog, can it be that you really don't understand that I must?
Don't you understand the most self-evident fact?" I made no answer, for I noticed --
$ 343
and new life ran through me, life such as terror gives -- I noticed from almost invisible
indications, which perhaps nobody but myself could have noticed, that in the depths
of his chest the hound was preparing to upraise a song. "You're going to sing," I said.
"Yes," he replied gravely, "I'm going to sing, soon, but not yet." "You're beginning
already," I said. "No," he said, "not yet. But be prepared." "I can hear it already, though
you deny it," I said, trembling. He was silent, and then I thought I saw something such
as no dog before me had ever seen, at least there is no slightest hint of it in our
tradition, and I hastily bowed my head in infinite fear and shame in the pool of blood
lying before me. I thought I saw that the hound was already singing without knowing
it, nay, more, that the melody, separated from him, was floating on the air in
accordance with its own laws, and, as though he had no part in it, was moving toward
me, toward me alone. Today, of course, I deny the validity of all such perceptions and
ascribe them to my overexcitation at that time, but even if it was an error it had
nevertheless a sort of grandeur, and is the sole, even if delusive, reality that I have
carried over into this world from my period of fasting, and shows at least how far we
can go when we are beyond ourselves. And I was actually quite beyond myself. In
ordinary circumstances I would have been very ill, incapable of moving; but the
melody, which the hound soon seemed to acknowledge as his, was quite irresistible. It
grew stronger and stronger; its waxing power seemed to have no limits, and already
almost burst my eardrums. But the worst was that it seemed to exist solely for my
sake, this voice before whose sublimity the woods fell silent, to exist solely for my sake;
who was I, that I could dare to remain here, lying brazenly before it in my pool of
blood and filth. I tottered to my feet and looked down at myself; this wretched body
can never run, I still had time to think, but already, spurred on by the melody, I was
careering from the spot in splendid style. I said nothing to my friends; probably I could
have told them all when I first arrived, but I was too feeble, and later it seemed to me
that such things could not be told. Hints which I could not refrain from occasionally
dropping were quite lost in the general conversation. For the rest I recovered
physically in a few hours, but spiritually I still suffer from the effects of that
experiment.
$ 344
 Nevertheless, I next carried my researches into music. True, science had not
been idle in this sphere either; the science of music, if I am correctly informed, is
perhaps still more comprehensive than that of nurture, and in any case established on
a firmer basis. That may be explained by the fact that this province admits of more
objective inquiry than the other, and its knowledge is more a matter of pure
observation and systematization, while in the province of food the main object is to
achieve practical results. That is the reason why the science of music is accorded
greater esteem than that of nurture, but also why the former has never penetrated so
deeply into the life of the people. I myself felt less attracted to the science of music
than to any other until I heard that voice in the forest. My experience with the musical
dogs had indeed drawn my attention to music, but I was still too young at that time.
Nor is it by any means easy even to come to grips with that science; it is regarded as
very esoteric and politely excludes the crowd. Besides, although what struck me most
deeply at first about these dogs was their music, their silence seemed to me still more
significant; as for their affrighting music, probably it was quite unique, so that I could
leave it out of account; but thenceforth their silence confronted me everywhere and in
all the dogs I met. So for penetrating into real dog nature, research into food seemed
to me the best method, calculated to lead me to my goal by the straightest path.
Perhaps I was mistaken. A border region between these two sciences, however, had
already attracted my attention. I mean the theory of incantation, by which food is
called down. Here again it is very much against me that I have never seriously tackled
the science of music and in this sphere cannot even count myself among the halfeducated, the class on whom science looks down most of all. This fact I cannot get
away from. I could not -- I have proof of that, unfortunately -- I could not pass even
the most elementary scientific examination set by an authority on the subject. Of
course, quite apart from the circumstances already mentioned, the reason for that can
be found in my incapacity for scientific investigation, my limited powers of thought,
my bad memory, but above all in my inability to keep my scientific aim continuously
before my eyes. All this I frankly admit, even with a certain degree of pleasure. For the
more profound cause of my scientific incapacity seems to me to be an instinct, and
$ 345
indeed by no means a bad one. If I wanted to brag I might say that it was this very
instinct that invalidated my scientific capacities, for it would surely be a very
extraordinary thing if one who shows a tolerable degree of intelligence in dealing with
the ordinary daily business of life, which certainly cannot be called simple, and
moreover one whose findings have been checked and verified, where that was possible,
by individual scientists if not by science itself, should a priori be incapable of planting
his paw even on the first rung of the ladder of science. It was this instinct that made
me -- and perhaps for the sake of science itself, but a different science from that of
today, an ultimate science -- prize freedom higher than everything else. Freedom!
Certainly such freedom as is possible today is a wretched business. But nevertheless
freedom, nevertheless a possession.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
A Little Woman
 SHE is a little woman; naturally quite slim, she is tightly laced as well; she is
$ 346
always in the same dress when I see her, it is made of grayish-yellow stuff something
the color of wood and is trimmed discreetly with tassels or buttonlike hangings of the
same color; she never wears a hat, her dull, fair hair is smooth and not untidy, but
worn very loose. Although she is tightly laced she is quick and light in her movements,
actually she rather overdoes the quickness, she loves to put her hands on her hips and
abruptly turn the upper part of her body sideways with a suddenness that is surprising.
The impression her hand makes on me I can convey only by saying that I have never
seen a hand with the separate fingers so sharply differentiated from each other as hers;
and yet her hand has no anatomical peculiarities, it is an entirely normal hand.
 This little woman, then, is very ill-pleased with me, she always finds something
objectionable in me, I am always doing the wrong thing to her, I annoy her at every
step; if a life could be cut into the smallest of small pieces and every scrap of it could
be separately assessed, every scrap of my life would certainly be an offense to her. I
have often wondered why I am such an offense to her; it may be that everything about
me outrages her sense of beauty, her feeling for justice, her habits, her traditions, her
hopes, there are such completely incompatible natures, but why does that upset her so
much? There is no connection between us that could force her to suffer because of me.
All she has to do is to regard me as an utter stranger, which I am, and which I do not
object to being, indeed I should welcome it, she only needs to forget my existence,
which I have never thrust upon her attention, nor ever would, and obviously her
torments would be at an end. I am not thinking of myself, I am quite leaving out of
account the fact that I find her attitude of course rather trying, leaving it out of
account because I recognize that my discomfort is nothing to the suffering she
endures. All the same I am well aware that hers is no affectionate suffering; she is not
concerned to make any real improvement in me, besides, whatever she finds
objectionable in me is not of a nature to hinder my development. Yet she does not care
about my development either, she cares only for her personal interest in the matter,
which is to revenge herself for the torments I cause her now and to prevent any
torments that threaten her from me in the future. I have already tried once to indicate
$ 347
the best way of putting a stop to this perpetual resentment of hers, but my very
attempt wrought her up to such a pitch of fury that I shall never repeat it.
 I feel too a certain responsibility laid upon me, if you like to put it that way, for
strangers as we are to each other, the little woman and myself, and however true it is
that the sole connection between us is the vexation I cause her, or rather the vexation
she lets me cause her, I ought not to feel indifferent to the visible physical suffering
which this induces in her. Every now and then, and more frequently of late,
information is brought to me that she has risen of a morning pale, unslept, oppressed
by headache, and almost unable to work; her family are worried about her, they
wonder what can have caused her condition, and they have not yet found the answer. I
am the only one who knows that it is her settled and daily renewed vexation with me.
True, I am not so worried about her as her family; she is hardy and tough; anyone who
is capable of such strong feeling is likely also to be capable of surviving its effects; I
have even a suspicion that her sufferings -- or some of them, at least -- are only a
pretense put up to bring public suspicion on me. She is too proud to admit openly
what a torment my very existence is to her; to make any appeal to others against me
she would consider beneath her dignity; it is only disgust, persistent and active disgust,
that drives her to be preoccupied with me; to discuss in public this unclean affliction
of hers would be too shameful. But to keep utterly silent about something that so
persistently rankles would be also too much for her. So with feminine guile she steers a
middle course; she keeps silent but betrays all the outward signs of a secret sorrow in
order to draw public attention to the matter. Perhaps she even hopes that once public
attention is fixed on me a general public rancor against me will rise up and use all its
great powers to condemn me definitively much more effectively and quickly than her
relatively feeble private rancor could do; she would then retire into the background,
draw a breath of relief, and turn her back on me. Well, if that is what her hopes are
really set on, she is deluding herself. Public opinion will not take over her role; public
opinion would never find me so infinitely objectionable, even under its most powerful
magnifying glass. I am not so altogether useless a creature as she thinks; I don't want
$ 348
to boast and especially not in this connection; but if I am not conspicuous for specially
useful qualities, I am certainly not conspicuous for the lack of them; only to her, only
to her almost bleached eyes, do I appear so, she won't be able to convince anyone else.
So in this respect I can feel quite reassured, can I? No, not at all; for if it becomes
generally known that my behavior is making her positively ill, which some observers,
those who most industriously bring me information about her, for instance, are not far
from perceiving, or at least look as if they perceived it, and the world should put
questions to me, why am I tormenting the poor little woman with my incorrigibility,
and do I mean to drive her to her death, and when am I going to show some sense and
have enough decent human feeling to stop such goings-on -- if the world were to ask
me that, it would be difficult to find an answer. Should I admit frankly that I don't
much believe in these symptoms of illness, and thus produce the unfavorable
impression of being a man who blames others to avoid being blamed himself, and in
such an ungallant manner? And how could I say quite openly that even if I did believe
that she were really ill, I should not feel the slightest sympathy for her, since she is a
complete stranger to me and any connection between us is her own invention and
entirely one-sided. I don't say that people wouldn't believe me; they wouldn't be
interested enough to get so far as belief; they would simply note the answer I gave
concerning such a frail, sick woman, and that would be little in my favor. Any answer I
made would inevitably come up against the world's incapacity to keep down the
suspicion that there must be a love affair behind such a case as this, although it is as
clear as daylight that such a relationship does not exist, and that if it did it would come
from my side rather than hers, since I should be really capable of admiring the little
woman for the decisive quickness of her judgment and her persistent vitality in leaping
to conclusions, if these very qualities were not always turned as weapons against me.
She, at any rate, shows not a trace of friendliness toward me; in that she is honest and
true; therein lies my last hope; not even to help on her campaign would she so far
forget herself as to let any such suspicion arise. But public opinion which is wholly
insensitive in such matters would abide by its prejudices and always denounce me.
$ 349
 So the only thing left for me to do would be to change myself in time, before
the world could intervene, just sufficiently to lessen the little woman's rancor, not to
wean her from it altogether, which is unthinkable. And indeed I have often asked
myself if I am so pleased with my present self as to be unwilling to change it, and
whether I could not attempt some changes in myself, even though I should be doing so
not because I found them needful but merely to propitiate the little woman. And I
have honestly tried, taking some trouble and care, it even did me good, it was almost a
diversion; some changes resulted which were visible a long way off, I did not need to
draw her attention to them, she perceives all that kind of thing much sooner than I do,
she can even perceive by my expression beforehand what I have in mind; but no
success crowned my efforts. How could it possibly do so? Her objection to me, as I am
now aware, is a fundamental one; nothing can remove it, not even the removal of
myself; if she heard that I had committed suicide she would fall into transports of rage.
 Now I cannot imagine that such a sharp-witted woman as she is does not
understand as well as I do both the hopelessness of her own course of action and the
helplessness of mine, my inability, with the best will in the world, to conform to her
requirements. Of course she understands it, but being a fighter by nature she forgets it
in the lust of battle, and my unfortunate disposition, which I cannot help since it is
mine by nature, conditions me to whisper gentle admonitions to anyone who flies into
a violent passion. In this way, naturally, we shall never come to terms. I shall keep on
leaving the house in the gay mood of early morning only to meet that countenance of
hers, lowering at the sight of me, the contemptuous curl of her lips, the measuring
glance, aware beforehand of what it is going to find, that sweeps over me and however
fleeting misses nothing, the sarcastic smile furrowing her girlish cheek, the
complaining lift of the eyes to Heaven, the planting of the hands on the hips, to fortify
herself, and then the access of rage that brings pallor with it and trembling.
 Not long ago I took occasion, for the very first time as I realized with some
astonishment, to mention the matter to a very good friend of mine, just in passing,
$ 350
casually, in a word or two, reducing it to even less than its just proportions, trivial as it
is in essence when looked at objectively. It was curious that my friend all the same did
not ignore it, indeed of his own accord he even made more of it than I had done,
would not be sidetracked, and insisted on discussing it. But it was still more curious
that in one important particular he underestimated it, for he advised me seriously to
go away for a short time. No advice could be less understandable; the matter was
simple enough, anyone who looked closely at it could see right through it, yet it was
not so simple that my mere departure would set all of it right, or even the greater part
of it. On the contrary, such a departure is just what I must avoid; if I am to follow a
plan at all it must be that of keeping the affair within its present narrow limits which
do not yet involve the outside world, that is to say, I must stay quietly where I am and
not let it affect my behavior as far as can be seen, and that includes mentioning it to no
one, but not at all because it is a kind of dangerous mystery, merely because it is a
trivial, purely personal matter and as such to be taken lightly, and to be kept on that
level. So my friend's remarks were not profitless after all, they taught me nothing new
yet they strengthened my original resolution.
 And on closer reflection it appears that the developments which the affair
seems to have undergone in the course of time are not developments in the affair
itself, but only in my attitude to it, insofar as that has become more composed on the
one hand, more manly, penetrating nearer the heart of the matter, while on the other
hand, under the influence of the continued nervous strain which I cannot overcome,
however slight, it has increased in irritability.
 I am less upset by the affair now that I think I perceive how unlikely it is to
come to any decisive crisis, imminent as that sometimes seems to be; one is easily
disposed, especially when one is young, to exaggerate the speed with which decisive
moments arrive; whenever my small critic, grown faint at the very sight of me, sank
sideways into a chair, holding on to the back of it with one hand and plucking at her
bodice strings with the other, while tears of rage and despair rolled down her cheeks, I
$ 351
used to think that now the moment had come and I was just on the point of being
summoned to answer for myself. Yet there was no decisive moment, no summons,
women faint easily, the world has no time to notice all their doings. And what has
really happened in all these years? Nothing except that such occasions have repeated
themselves, sometimes more and sometimes less violently, and that their sum total has
increased accordingly. And that people are hanging around in the offing and would
like to interfere if they could find some way of doing it; but they can find none, so up
till now they have had to rely on what they could smell out, and although that by itself
is fully qualified to keep the owners of the noses busy it can't do anything more. Yet
the situation was always like that, fundamentally, always provided with superfluous
bystanders and nosy onlookers, who always justified their presence by some cunning
excuse, for preference claiming to be relatives, always stretching their necks and
sniffing trouble, but all they have achieved is to be still standing by. The only
difference is that I have gradually come to recognize them and distinguish one face
from another; once upon a time I believed that they had just gradually trickled in from
outside, that the affair was having wider repercussions, which would themselves
compel a crisis; today I think I know that these onlookers were always there from the
beginning and have little or nothing to do with the imminence of a crisis. And the
crisis itself, why should I dignify it by such a name? If it ever should happen -- and
certainly not tomorrow or the day after tomorrow, most likely never -- that public
opinion concerns itself with the affair, which, I must repeat, is beyond its competence,
I certainly won't escape unharmed, but on the other hand people are bound to take
into account that I am not unknown to the public, that I have lived for long in the full
light of publicity, trustingly and trustworthily, and that this distressed little woman,
this latecomer in my life, who, let me remark in passing, another man might have
brushed off like a burr and privately trodden underfoot without a sound, that this
woman at the very worst could add only an ugly little flourish to the diploma in which
public opinion long ago certified me to be a respectable member of society. That is
how things stand today, little likely to cause me any uneasiness.
$ 352
 The fact that in the course of years I have all the same become somewhat
uneasy has nothing to do with the real significance of this affair; a man simply cannot
endure being a continual target for someone's spite, even when he knows well enough
that the spite is gratuitous; he grows uneasy, he begins, in a kind of physical way only,
to expect final decisions, even when like a sensible man he does not much believe that
they are forthcoming. Partly, too, it is a symptom of increasing age; youth sheds a
bloom over everything; awkward characteristics are lost to sight in the endless
upwelling of youthful energy; if as a youth a man has a somewhat wary eye it is not
counted against him, it is not noticed at all, even by himself; but the things that survive
in old age are residues, each is necessary, none is renewed, each is under scrutiny, and
the wary eye of an aging man is clearly a wary eye and is not difficult to recognize.
Only, as also in this case, it is not an actual degeneration of his condition.
 So from whatever standpoint I consider this small affair, it appears, and this I
will stick to, that if I keep my hand over it, even quite lightly, I shall quietly continue to
live my own life for a long time to come, untroubled by the world, despite all the
outbursts of the woman.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 353
The Burrow
 I HAVE COMPLETED the construction of my burrow and it seems to be
successful. All that can be seen from outside is a big hole; that, however, really leads
nowhere; if you take a few steps you strike against natural firm rock. I can make no
boast of having contrived this ruse intentionally; it is simply the remains of one of my
many abortive building attempts, but finally it seemed to me advisable to leave this
one hole without filling it in. True, some ruses are so subtle that they defeat
themselves, I know that better than anyone, and it is certainly a risk to draw attention
by this hole to the fact that there may be something in the vicinity worth inquiring
into. But you do not know me if you think I am afraid, or that I built my burrow simply
out of fear. At a distance of some thousand paces from this hole lies, covered by a
movable layer of moss, the real entrance to the burrow; it is secured as safely as
anything in this world can be secured; yet someone could step on the moss or break
through it, and then my burrow would lie open, and anybody who liked -- please note,
however, that quite uncommon abilities would also be required -- could make his way
in and destroy everything for good. I know that very well, and even now, at the zenith
of my life, I can scarcely pass an hour in complete tranquility; at that one point in the
dark moss I am vulnerable, and in my dreams I often see a greedy muzzle sniffing
around it persistently. It will be objected that I could quite well have filled in the
entrance too, with a thin layer of hard earth on top and with loose soil further down,
so that it would not cost me much trouble to dig my way out again whenever I liked.
But that plan is impossible; prudence itself demands that I should have a way of
leaving at a moment's notice if necessary, prudence itself demands, as alas! so often, to
risk one's life. All this involves very laborious calculation, and the sheer pleasure of the
mind in its own keenness is often the sole reason why one keeps it up. I must have a
way of leaving at a moment's notice, for, despite all my vigilance, may I not be attacked
from some quite unexpected quarter? I live in peace in the inmost chamber of my
$ 354
house, and meanwhile the enemy may be burrowing his way slowly and stealthily
straight toward me. I do not say that he has a better scent than I; probably he knows as
little about me as I of him. But there are insatiable robbers who burrow blindly
through the ground, and to whom the very size of my house gives the hope of hitting
by chance on some of its far-flung passages. I certainly have the advantage of being in
my own house and knowing all the passages and how they run. A robber may very
easily become my victim and a succulent one too. But I am growing old; I am not as
strong as many others, and my enemies are countless; it could well happen that in
flying from one enemy I might run into the jaws of another. Anything might happen!
In any case I must have the confident knowledge that somewhere there is an exit easy
to reach and quite free, where I have to do nothing whatever to get out, so that I might
never -- Heaven shield us! -- suddenly feel the teeth of the pursuer in my flank while I
am desperately burrowing away, even if it is at loose easy soil. And it is not only by
external enemies that I am threatened. There are also enemies in the bowels of the
earth. I have never seen them, but legend tells of them and I firmly believe in them.
They are creatures of the inner earth; not even legend can describe them. Their very
victims can scarcely have seen them; they come, you hear the scratching of their claws
just under you in the ground, which is their element, and already you are lost. Here it
is of no avail to console yourself with the thought that you are in your own house; far
rather are you in theirs. Not even my exit could save me from them; indeed in all
probability it would not save me in any case, but rather betray me; yet it is a hope, and
I cannot live without it. Apart from this main exit I am also connected with the outer
world by quite narrow, tolerably safe passages which provide me with good fresh air to
breathe. They are the work of the field mice. I have made judicious use of them,
transforming them into an organic part of my burrow. They also give me the
possibility of scenting things from afar, and thus serve as a protection. All sorts of
small fry, too, come running through them, and I devour these; so I can have a certain
amount of subterranean hunting, sufficient for a modest way of life, without leaving
my burrow at all; and that is naturally a great advantage.
$ 355
 But the most beautiful thing about my burrow is the stillness. Of course, that is
deceptive. At any moment it may be shattered and then all will be over. For the time
being, however, the silence is still with me. For hours I can stroll through my passages
and hear nothing except the rustling of some little creature, which I immediately
reduce to silence between my jaws, or the pattering of soil, which draws my attention
to the need for repair; otherwise all is still. The fragrance of the woods floats in; the
place feels both warm and cool. Sometimes I lie down and roll about in the passage
with pure joy. When autumn sets in, to possess a burrow like mine, and a roof over
your head, is great good fortune for anyone getting on in years. Every hundred yards I
have widened the passages into little round cells; there I can curl myself up in comfort
and lie warm. There I sleep the sweet sleep of tranquility, of satisfied desire, of
achieved ambition; for I possess a house. I do not know whether it is a habit that still
persists from former days, or whether the perils even of this house of mine are great
enough to awaken me; but invariably every now and then I start up out of profound
sleep and listen, listen into the stillness which reigns here unchanged day and night,
smile contentedly, and then sink with loosened limbs into still profounder sleep. Poor
homeless wanderers in the roads and woods, creeping for warmth into a heap of leaves
or a herd of their comrades, delivered to all the perils of heaven and earth! I lie here in
a room secured on every side -- there are more than fifty such rooms in my burrow --
and pass as much of my time as I choose between dozing and unconscious sleep.
 Not quite in the center of the burrow, carefully chosen to serve as a refuge in
case of extreme danger from siege if not from immediate pursuit, lies the chief cell.
While all the rest of the burrow is the outcome rather of intense intellectual than of
physical labor, this Castle Keep was fashioned by the most arduous labor of my whole
body. Several times, in the despair brought on by physical exhaustion, I was on the
point of giving up the whole business, flung myself down panting and cursed the
burrow, dragged myself outside and left the place lying open to all the world. I could
afford to do that, for I had no longer any wish to return to it, until at last, after four
hours or days, back I went repentantly, and when I saw that the burrow was unharmed
$ 356
I could almost have raised a hymn of thanksgiving, and in sincere gladness of heart
started on the work anew. My labors on the Castle Keep were also made harder, and
unnecessarily so (unnecessarily in that the burrow derived no real benefit from those
labors), by the fact that just at the place where, according to my calculations, the
Castle Keep should be, the soil was very loose and sandy and had literally to be
hammered and pounded into a firm state to serve as a wall for the beautifully vaulted
chamber. But for such tasks the only tool I possess is my forehead. So I had to run with
my forehead thousands and thousands of times, for whole days and nights, against the
ground, and I was glad when the blood came, for that was a proof that the walls were
beginning to harden; and in that way, as everybody must admit, I richly paid for my
Castle Keep.
 In the Castle Keep I assemble my stores; everything over and above my daily
wants that I capture inside the burrow, and everything I bring back with me from my
hunting expeditions outside, I pile up here. The place is so spacious that food for half a
year scarcely fills it. Consequently I can divide up my stores, walk about among them,
play with them, enjoy their plenty and their various smells, and reckon up exactly how
much they represent. That done, I can always arrange accordingly, and make my
calculations and hunting plans for the future, taking into account the season of the
year. There are times when I am so well provided for that in my indifference to food I
never even touch the smaller fry that scuttle about the burrow, which, however, is
probably imprudent of me. My constant preoccupation with defensive measures
involves a frequent alteration or modification, though within narrow limits, of my
views on how the building can best be organized for that end. Then it sometimes
seems risky to make the Castle Keep the basis of defense; the ramifications of the
burrow present me with manifold possibilities, and it seems more in accordance with
prudence to divide up my stores somewhat, and put part of them in certain of the
smaller rooms; thereupon I mark off every third room, let us say, as a reserve
storeroom, or every fourth room as a main and every second as an auxiliary
storeroom, and so forth. Or I ignore certain passages altogether and store no food in
$ 357
them, so as to throw any enemy off the scent, or I choose quite at random a very few
rooms according to their distance from the main exit. Each of these new plans involves
of course heavy work; I have to make my calculations and then carry my stores to their
new places. True, I can do that at my leisure and without any hurry, and it is not at all
unpleasant to carry such good food in your jaws, to lie down and rest whenever you
like, and to nibble an occasional tasty tidbit. But it is not so pleasant when, as
sometimes happens, you suddenly fancy, starting up from your sleep, that the present
distribution of your stores is completely and totally wrong, might lead to great
dangers, and must be set right at once, no matter how tired or sleepy you may be; then
I rush, then I fly, then I have no time for calculation; and although I was about to
execute a perfectly new, perfectly exact plan, I now seize whatever my teeth hit upon
and drag it or carry it away, sighing, groaning, stumbling, and even the most
haphazard change in the present situation, which seems so terribly dangerous, can
satisfy me. Until little by little full wakefulness sobers me, and I can hardly understand
my panic haste, breathe in deeply the tranquility of my house, which I myself have
disturbed, return to my resting place, fall asleep at once in a new-won exhaustion, and
on awakening find hanging from my jaws, say, a rat, as indubitable proof of night
labors which already seem almost unreal. Then again there are times when the
storing of all my food in one place seems the best plan of all. Of what use to me could
my stores in the smaller rooms be, how much could I store there in any case? And
whatever I put there would block the passage, and be a greater hindrance than help to
me if I were pursued and had to fly. Besides, it is stupid but true that one's self-conceit
suffers if one cannot see all one's stores together, and so at one glance know how much
one possesses. And in dividing up my food in those various ways might not a great deal
get lost? I can't be always scouring through all my passages and cross-passages so as to
make sure that everything is in order. The idea of dividing up my stores is of course a
good one, but only if one had several rooms similar to my Castle Keep. Several such
rooms! Indeed! And who is to build them? In any case, they could not be worked into
the general plan of my burrow at this late stage. But I will admit that that is a fault in
my burrow; it is always a fault to have only one piece of anything. And I confess too
$ 358
that during the whole time I was constructing the burrow a vague idea that I should
have more such cells stirred in my mind, vaguely, yet clearly enough if I had only
welcomed it; I did not yield to it, I felt too feeble for the enormous labor it would
involve, more, I felt too feeble even to admit to myself the necessity for that labor, and
comforted myself as best I could with the vague hope that a building which in any
other case would clearly be inadequate, would in my own unique, exceptional, favored
case suffice, presumably because providence was interested in the preservation of my
forehead, that unique instrument. So I have only one Castle Keep, but my dark
premonitions that one would not suffice have faded. However that may be, I must
content myself with the one big chamber, the smaller ones are simply no substitute for
it, and so, when this conviction has grown on me, I begin once more to haul all my
stores back from them to the Castle Keep. For some time afterwards I find a certain
comfort in having all the passages and rooms free, in seeing my stores growing in the
Castle Keep and emitting their variegated and mingled smells, each of which delights
me in its own fashion, and every one of which I can distinguish even at a distance, as
far as the very remotest passages. Then I usually enjoy periods of particular tranquility,
in which I change my sleeping place by stages, always working in toward the center of
the burrow, always steeping myself more profoundly in the mingled smells, until at last
I can no longer restrain myself and one night rush into the Castle Keep, mightily fling
myself upon my stores, and glut myself with the best that I can seize until I am
completely gorged. Happy but dangerous hours; anyone who knew how to exploit
them could destroy me with ease and without any risk. Here too the absence of a
second or third large storeroom works to my detriment; for it is the single huge
accumulated mass of food that seduces me. I try to guard myself in various ways
against this danger; the distribution of my stores in the smaller rooms is really one of
these expedients; but unfortunately, like other such expedients, it leads through
renunciation to still greater greed, which, overruling my intelligence, makes me
arbitrarily alter my plans of defense to suit its ends.
 To regain my composure after such lapses I make a practice of reviewing the
$ 359
burrow, and after the necessary improvements have been carried out, frequently leave
it, though only for a short spell. Even at such moments the hardship of being without
it for a long time seems too punitive to me, yet I recognize clearly the need for
occasional short excursions. It is always with a certain solemnity that I approach the
exit again. During my spells of home life I avoid it, steer clear even of the outer
windings of the corridor that leads to it; besides, it is no easy job to wander about out
there, for I have contrived there a whole little maze of passages; it was there that I
began my burrow, at a time when I had no hope of ever completing it according to my
plans; I began, half in play, at that corner, and so my first joy in labor found riotous
satisfaction there in a labyrinthine burrow which at the time seemed to me the crown
of all burrows, but which I judge today, perhaps with more justice, to be too much of
an idle tour de force, not really worthy of the rest of the burrow, and though perhaps
theoretically brilliant -- here is my main entrance, I said in those days, ironically
addressing my invisible enemies and seeing them all already caught and stifled in the
outer labyrinth -- is in reality a flimsy piece of jugglery that would hardly withstand a
serious attack or the struggles of an enemy fighting for his life. Should I reconstruct
this part of my burrow? I keep on postponing the decision, and the labyrinth will
probably remain as it is. Apart from the sheer hard work that I should have to face, the
task would also be the most dangerous imaginable. When I began the burrow I could
work away at it in comparative peace of mind, the risk wasn't much greater than any
other risk; but to attempt that today would be to draw the whole world's attention, and
gratuitously, to my burrow; today the whole thing is impossible. I am almost glad of
that, for I still have a certain sentiment about this first achievement of mine. And if a
serious attack were attempted, what pattern of entrance at all would be likely to save
me? An entrance can deceive, can lead astray, can give the attacker no end of worry,
and the present one too can do that at a pinch. But a really serious attack has to be met
by an instantaneous mobilization of all the resources in the burrow and all the forces
of my body and soul -- that is self-evident. So this entrance can very well remain where
it is. The burrow has so many unavoidable defects imposed by natural causes that it
can surely stand this one defect for which I am responsible, and which I recognize as a
$ 360
defect, even if only after the event. In spite of that, however, I do not deny that this
fault worries me from time to time, indeed always. If on my customary rounds I avoid
this part of the burrow, the fundamental reason is that the sight of it is painful to me,
because I don't want to be perpetually reminded of a defect in my house, even if that
defect is only too disturbingly present in my mind. Let it continue to exist ineradicably
at the entrance; I can at least refuse to look at it as long as that is possible. If I merely
walk in the direction of the entrance, even though I may be separated from it by
several passages and rooms, I find myself sensing an atmosphere of great danger,
actually as if my hair were growing thin and in a moment might fly off and leave me
bare and shivering, exposed to the howls of my enemies. Yes, the mere thought of the
door itself, the end of the domestic protection, brings such feelings with it, yet it is the
labyrinth leading up to it that torments me most of all. Sometimes I dream, that I have
reconstructed it, transformed it completely, quickly, in a night, with a giant's strength,
nobody having noticed, and now it is impregnable; the nights in which such dreams
come to me are the sweetest I know, tears of joy and deliverance still glisten on my
beard when I awaken.
 So I must thread the tormenting complications of this labyrinth physically as
well as mentally whenever I go out, and I am both exasperated and touched when, as
sometimes happens, I lose myself for a moment in my own maze, and the work of my
hands seems to be still doing its best to prove its sufficiency to me, its maker, whose
final judgment has long since been passed on it. But then I find myself beneath the
mossy covering, which has been left untouched for so long -- for I stay for long spells
in my house -- that it has grown fast to the soil around it, and now only a little push
with my head is needed and I am in the upper world. For a long time I do not dare to
make that little movement, and if it were not that I would have to traverse the
labyrinth once more, I would certainly leave the matter for the time being and turn
back again. Just think. Your house is protected and self-sufficient. You live in peace,
warm, well nourished, master, sole master of all your manifold passages and rooms,
and all this you are prepared -- not to give up, of course -- but to risk it, so to speak;
$ 361
you nurse the confident hope, certainly, that you will regain it; yet is it not a
dangerous, a far too dangerous stake that you are playing for? Can there be any
reasonable grounds for such a step? No, for such acts as these there can be no
reasonable grounds. But all the same, I then cautiously raise the trap door and slip
outside, let it softly fall back again, and fly as fast as I can from the treacherous spot.
 Yet I am not really free. True, I am no longer confined by narrow passages, but
hunt through the open woods, and feel new powers awakening in my body for which
there was no room, as it were, in the burrow, not even in the Castle Keep, though it
had been ten times as big. The food too is better up here; though hunting is more
difficult, success more rare, the results are more valuable from every point of view; I
do not deny all this; I appreciate it and take advantage of it at least as fully as anyone
else, and probably more fully, for I do not hunt like a vagrant out of mere idleness or
desperation, but calmly and methodically. Also I am not permanently doomed to this
free life, for I know that my term is measured, that I do not have to hunt here forever,
and that, whenever I am weary of this life and wish to leave it, Someone, whose
invitation I shall not be able to withstand, will, so to speak, summon me to him. And
so I can pass my time here quite without care and in complete enjoyment, or rather I
could, and yet I cannot. My burrow takes up too much of my thoughts. I fled from the
entrance fast enough, but soon I am back at it again. I seek out a good hiding place and
keep watch on the entrance of my house -- this time from outside -- for whole days
and nights. Call it foolish if you like; it gives me infinite pleasure and reassures me. At
such times it is as if I were not so much looking at my house as at myself sleeping, and
had the joy of being in a profound slumber and simultaneously of keeping vigilant
guard over myself. I am privileged, as it were, not only to dream about the specters of
the night in all the helplessness and blind trust of sleep, but also at the same time to
confront them in actuality with the calm judgment of the fully awake. And strangely
enough I discover that my situation is not so bad as I had often thought, and will
probably think again when I return to my house. In this connection -- it may be in
others too, but in this one especially -- these excursions of mine are truly
$ 362
indispensable. Carefully as I have chosen an out-of-the-way place for my door, the
traffic that passes it is nevertheless, if one takes a week's observation, very great; but so
it is, no doubt, in all inhabited regions, and probably it is actually better to hazard the
risks of dense traffic, whose very impetus carries it past, than to be delivered in
complete solitude to the first persistently searching intruder. Here enemies are
numerous and their allies and accomplices still more numerous, but they fight one
another, and while thus employed rush past my burrow without noticing it. In all my
time I have never seen anyone investigating the actual door of my house, which is
fortunate both for me and for him, for I would certainly have launched myself at his
throat, forgetting everything else in my anxiety for the burrow. True, creatures come,
in whose vicinity I dare not remain, and from whom I have to fly as soon as I scent
them in the distance; on their attitude to the burrow I really can't pronounce with
certainty, but it is at least a reassurance that when I presently return I never find any of
them there, and the entrance is undamaged. There have been happy periods in which I
could almost assure myself that the enmity of the world toward me had ceased or been
assuaged, or that the strength of the burrow had raised me above the destructive
struggle of former times. The burrow has probably protected me in more ways than I
thought or dared think while I was inside it. This fancy used to have such a hold over
me that sometimes I have been seized by the childish desire never to return to the
burrow again, but to settle down somewhere close to the entrance, to pass my life
watching the entrance, and gloat perpetually upon the reflection -- and in that find my
happiness -- how steadfast a protection my burrow would be if I were inside it. Well,
one is soon roughly awakened from childish dreams. What does this protection which
I am looking at here from the outside amount to after all? Dare I estimate the danger
which I run inside the burrow from observations which I make when outside? Can my
enemies, to begin with, have any proper awareness of me if I am not in my burrow? A
certain awareness of me they certainly have, but not full awareness. And is not that full
awareness the real definition of a state of danger? So the experiments I attempt here
are only half-experiments or even less, calculated merely to reassure my fears and by
giving me false reassurance to lay me open to great perils. No, I do not watch over my
$ 363
own sleep, as I imagined; rather it is I who sleep, while the destroyer watches. Perhaps
he is one of those who pass the entrance without seeming to notice it, concerned
merely to ascertain, just like myself, that the door is still untouched and waits for their
attack, and only pass because they know that the master of the house is out, or because
they are quite aware that he is guilelessly lying on the watch in the bushes close by.
And I leave my post of observation and find I have had enough of this outside life; I
feel that there is nothing more that I can learn here, either now or at any time. And I
long to say a last goodbye to everything up here, to go down into my burrow never to
return again, let things take their course, and not try to retard them with my profitless
vigils. But spoiled by seeing for such a long time everything that happened around the
entrance, I find great difficulty in summoning the resolution to carry out the actual
descent, which might easily draw anyone's attention, and without knowing what is
happening behind my back and behind the door after it is fastened. I take advantage of
stormy nights to get over the necessary preliminaries, and quickly bundle in my spoil;
that seems to have come off, but whether it has really come off will only be known
when I myself have made the descent; it will be known, but not by me, or by me, but
too late. So I give up the attempt and do not make the descent. I dig an experimental
burrow, naturally at a good distance from the real entrance, a burrow just as long as
myself, and seal it also with a covering of moss. I creep into my hole, close it after me,
wait patiently, keep vigil for long or short spells, and at various hours of the day, then
fling off the moss, issue from my hole, and summarize my observations. These are
extremely heterogeneous, and both good and bad; but I have never been able to
discover a universal principle or an infallible method of descent. In consequence of all
this I have not yet summoned the resolution to make my actual descent, and am
thrown into despair at the necessity of doing it soon. I almost screw myself to the
point of deciding to emigrate to distant parts and take up my old comfortless life
again, which had no security whatever, but was one indiscriminate succession of
perils, yet in consequence prevented one from perceiving and fearing particular perils,
as I am constantly reminded by comparing my secure burrow with ordinary life.
Certainly such a decision would be an arrant piece of folly, produced simply by living
$ 364
too long in senseless freedom; the burrow is still mine, I have only to take a single step
and I am safe. And I tear myself free from all my doubts and by broad daylight rush to
the door, quite resolved to raise it now; but I cannot, I rush past it and fling myself into
a thorn bush, deliberately, as a punishment, a punishment for some sin I do not know
of. Then, at the last moment, I am forced to admit to myself that I was right after all,
and that it was really impossible to go down into the burrow without exposing the
thing I love best, for a little while at least, to all my enemies, on the ground, in the
trees, in the air. And the danger is by no means a fanciful one, but very real. It need
not be any particular enemy that is provoked to pursue me, it may very well be some
chance innocent little creature, some disgusting little beast which follows me out of
curiosity, and thus, without knowing it, becomes the leader of all the world against me;
nor need it be even that, it may be -- and that would be just as bad, indeed in some
respects worse -- it may be someone of my own kind, a connoisseur and prizer of
burrows, a hermit, a lover of peace, but all the same a filthy scoundrel who wishes to
be housed where he has not built. If he were actually to arrive now, if in his obscene
lust he were to discover the entrance and set about working at it, lifting the moss; if he
were actually to succeed, if he were actually to wriggle his way in in my stead, until
only his hindquarters still showed; if all this were actually to happen, so that at last,
casting all prudence to the winds, I might in my blind rage leap on him, maul him, tear
the flesh from his bones, destroy him, drink his blood, and fling his corpse among the
rest of my spoil, but above all -- that is the main thing -- were at last back in my
burrow once more, I would have it in my heart to greet the labyrinth itself with
rapture; but first I would draw the moss covering over me, and I would want to rest, it
seems to me, for all the remainder of my life. But nobody comes and I am left to my
own resources. Perpetually obsessed by the sheer difficulty of the attempt, I lose much
of my timidity, I no longer attempt even to appear to avoid the entrance, but make a
hobby of prowling around it; by now it is almost as if I were the enemy spying out a
suitable opportunity for successfully breaking in. If I only had someone I could trust to
keep watch at post of observation; then of course I could descend in perfect peace of
mind. I would make an agreement with this trusty confederate of mine that he would
$ 365
keep a careful note of the state of things during my descent and for quite a long time
afterwards, and if he saw any sign of danger knock on the moss covring, and if he saw
nothing do nothing. With that a clean sweep would be made of all my fears, no residue
would be left, or at most my confidant. For would he not demand some counterservice from me; would he not at least want to see the burrow? That in itself, to let
anyone freely into my burrow, would be exquisitely painful to me. I built it for myself,
not for visitors, and I think I would refuse to admit him, not even though he alone
made it possible for me to get into the burrow would I let him in. But I simply could
not admit him, for either I must let him go in first by himself, which is simply
unimaginable, or we must both descend at the same time, in which case the advantage
I am supposed to derive from him, that of being kept watch over, would be lost. And
what trust can I really put in him? Can I trust one whom I have had under my eyes just
as fully when I can't see him, and the moss covering separates us? It is comparatively
easy to trust anyone if you are supervising him or at least can supervise him; perhaps it
is possible even to trust someone at a distance; but completely to trust someone
outside the burrow when you are inside the burrow, that is, in a different world, that, it
seems to me, is impossible. But such considerations are not in the least necessary; the
mere reflection is enough that during or after my descent one of the countless
accidents of existence might prevent my confidant from fulfilling his duty, and what
incalculable results might not the smallest accident of that kind have for me? No, if
one takes it by and large, I have no right to complain that I am alone and have nobody
that I can trust. I certainly lose nothing by that and probably spare myself trouble. I
can only trust myself and my burrow. I should have thought of that before and taken
measures to meet the difficulty that worries me so much now. When I began the
burrow it would at least have been partly possible. I should have so constructed the
first passage that it had two entrances at a moderate distance from each other, so that
after descending through the one entrance with that slowness which is unavoidable, I
might rush at once through the passage to the second entrance, slightly raise the moss
covering, which would be so arranged as to make that easy, and from there keep watch
on the position for several days and nights. That would have been the only right way of
$ 366
doing it. True, the two entrances would double the risk, but that consideration need
not delay me, for one of the entrances, serving merely as a post of observation, could
be quite narrow. And with that I lose myself in a maze of technical speculations, I
begin once more to dream my dream of a completely perfect burrow, and that
somewhat calms me; with closed eyes I behold with delight perfect or almost perfect
structural devices for enabling me to slip out and in unobserved. While I lie there
thinking such things I admire these devices very greatly, but only as technical
achievements, not as real advantages; for this freedom to slip out and in at will, what
does it amount to? It is the mark of a restless nature, of inner uncertainty, disreputable
desires, evil propensities that seem still worse when one thinks of the burrow, which is
there at one's hand and can flood one with peace if one only remains quite open and
receptive to it. For the present, however, I am outside it seeking some possibility of
returning, and for that the necessary technical devices would be very desirable. But
perhaps not so very desirable after all. Is it not a very grave injustice to the burrow to
regard it in moments of nervous panic as a mere hole into which one can creep and be
safe? Certainly it is a hole among other things, and a safe one, or should be, and when I
picture myself in the midst of danger, then I insist with clenched teeth and all my will
that the burrow should be nothing but a hole set apart to save me, and that it should
fufill that clearly defined function with the greatest possible efficiency, and I am ready
to absolve it from every other duty. Now the truth of the matter -- and one has no eye
for that in times of great peril, and only by a great effort even in times when danger is
threatening -- is that in reality the burrow does provide a considerable degree of
security, but by no means enough, for is one ever free from anxieties inside it? These
anxieties are different from ordinary ones, prouder, richer in content, often long
repressed, but in their destructive effects they are perhaps much the same as the
anxieties that existence in the outer world gives rise to. Had I constructed the burrow
exclusively to assure my safety I would not have been disappointed, it is true;
nevertheless the relation between the enormous labor involved and the actual security
it would provide, at least insofar as I could feel it and profit by it, would not have been
in my favor. It is extremely painful to have to admit such things to oneself, but one is
$ 367
forced to do it, confronted by that entrance over there which now literally locks and
bars itself against me, the builder and possessor. Yet the burrow is not a mere hole for
taking refuge in. When I stand in the Castle Keep surrounded by my piled-up stores,
surveying the ten passages which begin there, raised and sunken passages, vertical and
rounded passages, wide and narrow passages, as the general plan dictates, and all alike
still and empty, ready by their various routes to conduct me to all the other rooms,
which are also still and empty -- then all thought of mere safety is far from my mind,
then I know that here is my castle, which I have wrested from the refractory soil with
tooth and claw, with pounding and hammering blows, my castle which can never
belong to anyone else, and is so essentially mine that I can calmly accept in it even my
enemy's mortal stroke at the final hour, for my blood will ebb away here in my own
soil and not be lost. And what but that is the meaning of the blissful hours which I
pass, now peacefully slumbering, now happily keeping watch, in these passages, these
passages which suit me so well, where one can stretch oneself out in comfort, roll
about in childish delight, lie and dream, or sink into blissful sleep. And the smaller
rooms, each familiar to me, so familiar that in spite of their complete similarity I can
clearly distinguish one from the other with my eyes shut by the mere feel of the wall:
they enclose me more peacefully and warmly than a bird is enclosed in its nest. And
all, all still and empty.
 But if that is the case, why do I hang back? Why do I dread the thought of the
intruding enemy more than the possibility of never seeing my burrow again? Well, the
latter alternative is fortunately an impossibility; there is no need for me even to take
thought to know what the burrow means to me; I and the burrow belong so
indissolubly together that in spite of all my fears I could make myself quite
comfortable out here, and not even need to overcome my repugnance and open the
door; I could be quite content to wait here passively, for nothing can part us for long,
and somehow or other I shall quite certainly find myself in my burrow again. But on
the other hand how much time may pass before then, and how many things may
happen in that time, up here no less than down there? And it lies with me solely to
$ 368
curtail that interval and to do what is necessary at once.
 And then, too exhausted to be any longer capable of thought, my head hanging,
my legs trembling with fatigue, half asleep, feeling my way rather than walking, I
approach the entrance, slowly raise the moss covering, slowly descend, leaving the
door open in my distraction for a needlessly long time, and presently remember my
omission, and get out again to make it good -- but what need was there to get out for
that? All that was needed was to draw to the moss covering; right; so I creep in again
and now at last draw to the moss covering. Only in this state, and in this state alone,
can I achieve my descent. So at last I lie down beneath the moss on the top of my
bloodstained spoil and can now enjoy my longed-for sleep. Nothing disturbs me, no
one has tracked me down, above the moss everything seems to be quiet thus far at
least, but even if all were not quiet I question whether I could stop to keep watch now;
I have changed my place, I have left the upper world and am in my burrow, and I feel
its effect at once. It is a new world, endowing me with new powers, and what I felt as
fatigue up there is no longer that here. I have returned from a journey dog-tired with
my wanderings, but the sight of the old house, the thought of all the things that are
waiting to be done, the necessity at least to cast a glance at all the rooms, but above all
to make my way immediately to the Castle Keep; all this transforms my fatigue into
ardent zeal; it is as though at the moment when I set foot in the burrow I had wakened
from a long and profound sleep. My first task is a very laborious one and requires all
my attention; I mean getting my spoil through the narrow and thin-walled passages of
the labyrinth. I shove with all my might, and the work gets done too, but far too slowly
for me; to hasten it I drag part of my flesh supply back again and push my way over it
and through it; now I have only a portion of my spoil before me and it is easier to make
progress; but my road is so blocked by all this flesh in these narrow passages, through
which it is not always easy for me to make my way even when I am alone, that I could
quite easily smother among my own stores; sometimes I can only rescue myself from
their pressure by eating and drinking a clear space for myself. But the work of
transport is successful, I finish it in quite a reasonable time, the labyrinth is behind me,
$ 369
I reach an ordinary passage and breathe freely, push my spoil through a
communication passage into a main passage expressly designed for the purpose, a
passage sloping down steeply to the Castle Keep. What is left to be done is not really
work at all; my whole load rolls and flows down the passage almost of itself. The Castle
Keep at last! At last I can dare to rest. Everything is unchanged, no great mishap seems
to have occurred, the few little defects that I note at a first glance can soon be repaired;
first, however, I must go my long round of all the passages, but that is no hardship,
that is merely to commune again with friends, as I often did in the old days or -- I am
not so very old yet, but my memory of many things is already quite confused -- as I
often did, or as I have often heard that it was done. Now I begin with the second
passage, purposefully slow, now that I have seen the Castle Keep I have endless time --
inside the burrow I always have endless time -- for everything I do there is good and
important and satisfies me somehow. I begin with the second passage, but break off in
the middle and turn into the third passage and let it take me back again to the Castle
Keep, and now of course I have to begin at the second passage once more, and so I
play with my task and lengthen it out and smile to myself and enjoy myself and
become quite dazed with all the work in front of me, but never think of turning aside
from it. It is for your sake, ye passages and rooms, and you, Castle Keep, above all, that
I have come back, counting my own life as nothing in the balance, after stupidly
trembling for it for so long, and postponing my return to you. What do I care for
danger now that I am with you? You belong to me, I to you, we are united; what can
harm us? What if my foes should be assembling even now up above there and their
muzzles be preparing to break through the moss? And with its silence and emptiness
the burrow answers me, confirming my words. But now a feeling of lassitude
overcomes me and in some favorite room I curl myself up tentatively, I have not yet
surveyed everything by a long way, though still resolved to examine everything to the
very end; I have no intention of sleeping here, I have merely yielded to the temptation
of making myself comfortable and pretending I want to sleep, I merely wish to find out
if this is as good a place for sleeping as it used to be. It is, but it is a better place for
sleep than for waking, and I remain lying where I am in deep slumber.
$ 370
 I must have slept for a long time. I was only wakened when I had reached the
last light sleep which dissolves of itself, and it must have been very light, for it was an
almost inaudible whistling noise that wakened me. I recognized what it was
immediately; the small fry, whom I had allowed far too much latitude, had burrowed a
new channel somewhere during my absence, this channel must have chanced to
intersect an older one, the air was caught there, and that produced the whistling noise.
What an indefatigably busy lot these small fry are, and what a nuisance their diligence
can be! First I shall have to listen at the walls of my passages and locate the place of
disturbance by experimental excavations, and only then will I be able to get rid of the
noise. However, this new channel may be quite welcome as a further means of
ventilation, if it can be fitted into the plan of the burrow. But after this I shall keep a
much sharper eye on the small fry than I used to; I shall spare none of them.
 As I have a good deal of experience in investigations of this kind the work
probably will not take me long and I can start upon it at once; there are other jobs
awaiting me, it is true, but this is the most urgent. I must have silence in my passages.
This noise, however, is a comparatively innocent one; I did not hear it at all when I
first arrived, although it must certainly have been there; I must first feel quite at home
before I could hear it; it is, so to speak, audible only to the ear of the householder. And
it is not even constant, as such noises usually are; there are long pauses, obviously
caused by stoppages of the current of air. I start on my investigations, but I can't find
the right place to begin at, and though I cut a few trenches I do it at random; naturally
that has no effect, and the hard work of digging and the still harder work of filling the
trenches up again and beating the earth firm is so much labor lost. I don't seem to be
getting any nearer to the place where the noise is, it goes on always on the same thin
note, with regular pauses, now a sort of whistling, but again like a kind of piping. Now
I could leave it to itself for the time being; it is very disturbing, certainly, but there can
hardly be any doubt that its origin is what I took it to be at first; so it can scarcely
become louder, on the contrary, such noises may quite well -- though until now I have
never had to wait so long for that to happen -- may quite well vanish of themselves in
$ 371
the course of time through the continued labors of these little burrowers; and apart
from that, often chance itself puts one on the track of the disturbance, where
systematic investigation has failed for a long time. In such ways I comfort myself, and
resolve simply to continue my tour of the passages, and visit the rooms, many of which
I have not even seen yet since my return, and enjoy myself contemplating the Castle
Keep now and then between times; but my anxiety will not let me, and I must go on
with my search. These little creatures take up much, far too much, time that could be
better employed. In such cases as the present it is usually the technical problem that
attracts me; for example, from the noise, which my ear can distinguish in all its finest
shades, so that it has a perfectly clear outline to me, I deduce its cause, and now I am
on fire to discover whether my conclusion is valid. And with good reason, for as long
as that is not established I cannot feel safe, even if it were merely a matter of
discovering where a grain of sand that had fallen from one of the walls had rolled to.
And a noise such as this is by no means a trifling matter, regarded from that angle. But
whether trifling or important, I can find nothing, no matter how hard I search, or it
may be that I find too much. This had to happen just in my favorite room, I think to
myself, and I walk a fair distance away from it, almost halfway along the passage
leading to the next room; I do this more as a joke, pretending to myself that my
favorite room is not alone to blame, but that there are disturbances elsewhere as well,
and with a smile on my face I begin to listen; but soon I stop smiling, for, right enough,
the same whistling meets me here too. It is really nothing to worry about; sometimes I
think that nobody but myself would hear it; it is true, I hear it now more and more
distinctly, for my ear has grown keener through practice; though in reality it is exactly
the same noise wherever I may hear it, as I have convinced myself by comparing my
impressions. Nor is it growing louder; I recognize this when I listen in the middle of
the passage instead of pressing my ear against the wall. Then it is only with an effort,
indeed with great intentness, that I can more guess at than hear the merest trace of a
noise now and then. But it is this very uniformity of the noise everywhere that disturbs
me most, for it cannot be made to agree with my original assumption. Had I rightly
divined the cause of the noise, then it must have issued with greatest force from some
$ 372
given place, which it would be my task to discover, and after that have grown fainter
and fainter. But if my hypothesis does not meet the case, what can the explanation be?
There still remains the possibility that there are two noises, that up to now I have been
listening at a good distance from the two centers, and that while its noise increases,
when I draw near to one of them, the total result remains approximately the same for
the ear in consequence of the lessening volume of sound from the other center.
Already I have almost fancied sometimes, when I have listened carefully, that I could
distinguish, if very indistinctly, differences of tone which support this new assumption.
In any case I must extend my sphere of investigation much farther than I have done.
Accordingly I descend the passage to the Castle Keep and begin to listen there.
Strange, the same noise there too. Now it is a noise produced by the burrowing of
some species of small fry who have infamously exploited my absence; in any case they
have no intention of doing me harm, they are simply busied with their own work, and
so long as no obstacle comes in their way they will keep on in the direction they have
taken: I know all this, yet that they should have dared to approach the very Castle
Keep itself is incomprehensible to me and fills me with agitation, and confuses the
faculties which I need so urgently for the work before me. Here I have no wish to
discover whether it is the unusual depth at which the Castle Keep lies, or its great
extent and correspondingly powerful air suction, calculated to scare burrowing
creatures away, or the mere fact that it is the Castle Keep, that by some channel or
other has penetrated to their dull minds. In any case, I have never noticed any sign of
burrowing in the walls of the Castle Keep until now. Crowds of little beasts have come
here, it is true, attracted by the powerful smells; here I have had a constant hunting
ground, but my quarry has always burrowed a way through in the upper passages, and
come running down here, somewhat fearfully, but unable to withstand such a
temptation. But now, it seems, they are burrowing in all the passages. If I had only
carried out the best of the grand plans I thought out in my youth and early manhood,
or rather, if I had only had the strength to carry them out, for there would have been
no lack of will. One of these favorite plans of mine was to isolate the Castle Keep from
its surroundings, that is to say, to restrict the thickness of its walls to about my own
$ 373
height, and leave a free space of about the same width all around the Castle Keep,
except for a narrow foundation, which unfortunately would have to be left to bear up
the whole. I had always pictured this free space, and not without reason, as the
loveliest imaginable haunt. What a joy to lie pressed against the rounded outer wall,
pull oneself up, let oneself slide down again, miss one's footing and find oneself on
firm earth, and play all those games literally upon the Castle Keep and not inside it; to
avoid the Castle Keep, to rest one's eyes from it whenever one wanted, to postpone the
joy of seeing it until later and yet not have to do without it, but literally hold it safe
between one's claws, a thing that is impossible if you have only an ordinary open
entrance to it; but above all to be able to stand guard over it, and in that way to be so
completely compensated for renouncing the actual sight of it that, if one had to choose
between staying all one's life in the Castle Keep or in the free space outside it, one
would choose the latter, content to wander up and down there all one's days and keep
guard over the Castle Keep. Then there would be no noises in the walls, no insolent
burrowing up to the very Keep itself; then peace would be assured there and I would
be its guardian; then I would not have to listen with loathing to the burrowing of the
small fry, but with delight to something that I cannot hear now at all: the murmurous
silence of the Castle Keep.
 But that beautiful dream is past and I must set to work, almost glad that now
my work has a direct connection with the Castle Keep, for that wings it. Certainly, as I
can see more and more clearly, I need all my energies for this task, which at first
seemed quite a trifling one. I listen now at the walls of the Castle Keep, and wherever I
listen, high or low, at the roof or the floor, at the entrance or in the corners,
everywhere, everywhere, I hear the same noise. And how much time, how much care
must be wasted in listening to that noise, with its regular pauses. One can, if one
wishes, find a tiny deceitful comfort in the fact that here in the Castle Keep, because of
its vastness, one hears nothing at all, as distinguished from the passages, when one
stands back from the walls. Simply as a rest and a means to regain my composure I
often make this experiment, listen intently and am overjoyed when I hear nothing. But
$ 374
the question still remains, what can have happened? Confronted with this
phenomenon my original explanation completely falls to the ground. But I must also
reject other explanations which present themselves to me. One could assume, for
instance, that the noise I hear is simply that of the small fry themselves at their work.
But all my experience contradicts this; I cannot suddenly begin to hear now a thing
that I have never heard before though it was always there. My sensitiveness to
disturbances in the burrow has perhaps become greater with the years, yet my hearing
has by no means grown keener. It is of the very nature of small fry not to be heard.
Would I have tolerated them otherwise? Even at the risk of starvation I would have
exterminated them. But perhaps -- this idea now insinuates itself -- I am concerned
here with some animal unknown to me. That is possible. True, I have observed the life
down here long and carefully enough, but the world is full of diversity and is never
wanting in painful surprises. Yet it cannot be a single animal, it must be a whole
swarm that has suddenly fallen upon my domain, a huge swarm of little creatures,
which, as they are audible, must certainly be bigger than the small fry, but yet cannot
be very much bigger, for the sound of their labors is itself very faint. It may be, then, a
swarm of unknown creatures on their wanderings, who happen to be passing by my
way, who disturb me, but will presently cease to do so. So I could really wait for them
to pass, and need not put myself to the trouble of work that will be needless in the end.
Yet if these creatures are strangers, why is it that I never see any of them? I have
already dug a host of trenches, hoping to catch one of them, but I can find not a single
one. Then it occurs to me that they may be quite tiny creatures, far tinier than any I
am acquainted with, and that it is only the noise they make that is greater. Accordingly
I investigate the soil I have dug up, I cast the lumps into the air so that they break into
quite small particles, but the noisemakers are not among them. Slowly I come to
realize that by digging such small fortuitous trenches I achieve nothing; in doing that I
merely disfigure the walls of my burrow, scratching hastily here and there without
taking time to fill up the holes again; at many places already there are heaps of earth
which block my way and my view. Still, that is only a secondary worry; for now I can
neither wander about my house, nor review it, nor rest; often already I have fallen
$ 375
asleep at my work in some hole or other, with one paw clutching the soil above me,
from which in a semistupor I have been trying to tear a lump. I intend now to alter my
methods. I shall dig a wide and carefully constructed trench in the direction of the
noise and not cease from digging until, independent of all theories, I find the real
cause of the noise. Then I shall eradicate it, if that is within my power, and if it is not,
at least I shall know the truth. That truth will bring me either peace or despair, but
whether the one or the other, it will be beyond doubt or question. This decision
strengthens me. All that I have done till now seems to me far too hasty; in the
excitement of my return, while I had not yet shaken myself free from the cares of the
upper world, and was not yet completely penetrated by the peace of the burrow, but
rather hypersensitive at having had to renounce it for such a long time, I was thrown
into complete confusion of mind by an unfamiliar noise. And what was it? A faint
whistling, audible only at long intervals, a mere nothing to which I don't say that one
could actually get used, for no one could get used to it, but which one could, without
actually doing anything about it at once, observe for a while; that is, listen every few
hours, let us say, and patiently register the results, instead of, as I had done, keeping
one's ear fixed to the wall and at every hint of noise tearing out a lump of earth, not
really hoping to find anything, but simply so as to do something to give expression to
one's inward agitation. All that will be changed now, I hope. And then, with furious
shut eyes, I have to admit to myself that I hope nothing of the kind, for I am still
trembling with agitation just as I was hours ago, and if my reason did not restrain me I
would probably like nothing better than to start stubbornly and defiantly digging,
simply for the sake of digging, at some place or other, whether I heard anything there
or not; almost like the small fry, who burrow either without any object at all or simply
because they eat the soil. My new and reasonable plan both tempts me and leaves me
cold. There is nothing in it to object to, I at least know of no objection; it is bound, so
far as I can see, to achieve my aim. And yet at bottom I do not believe in it; I believe in
it so little that I do not even fear the terrors which its success may well bring, I do not
believe even in a dreadful denouement; indeed it seems to me that I have been
thinking ever since the first appearance of the noise of such a methodical trench, and
$ 376
have not begun upon it until now simply because I put no trust in it. In spite of that I
shall of course start on the trench; I have no other alternative; but I shall not start at
once, I shall postpone the task for a little while. If reason is to be reinstated on the
throne, it must be completely reinstated; I shall not rush blindly into my task. In any
case I shall first repair the damage that I have done to the burrow with my wild
digging; that will take a good long time, but it is necessary; if the new trench is really to
reach its goal it will probably be long, and if it should lead to nothing at all it will be
endless; in any case this task means a longish absence from the burrow, though an
absence by no means so painful as an absence in the upper world, for I can interrupt
my work whenever I like and pay a visit to my house; and even if I should not do that
the air of Castle Keep will be wafted to me and surround me while I work; nevertheless
it means leaving the burrow and surrendering myself to an uncertain fate, and
consequently I want to leave the burrow in good order behind me; it shall not be said
that I, who am fighting for its peace, have myself destroyed that peace without
reinstating it at once. So I begin by shoveling the soil back into the holes from which it
was taken, a kind of work I am familiar with, that I have done countless times almost
without regarding it as work, and at which, particularly as regards the final pressing
and smoothing down -- and this is no empty boast, but the simple truth -- I am
unbeatable. But this time everything seems difficult, I am too distracted, every now
and then, in the middle of my work, I press my ear to the wall and listen, and without
taking any notice let the soil that I have just lifted trickle back into the passage again.
The final embellishments, which demand a stricter attention, I can hardly achieve at
all. Hideous protuberances, disturbing cracks remain, not to speak of the fact that the
old buoyancy simply cannot be restored again to a wall patched up in such a way. I try
to comfort myself with the reflection that my present work is only temporary. When I
return after peace has been restored I shall repair everything properly: work will be
mere play to me then. Oh yes, work is mere play in fairy tales, and this comfort of
mine belongs to the realm of fairy tales too. It would be far better to do the work
thoroughly now, at once, far more reasonable than perpetually to interrupt it and
wander off through the passages to discover new sources of noise, which is easy
$ 377
enough, all that is needed being to stop at any point one likes and listen. And that is
not the end of my useless discoveries. Sometimes I fancy that the noise has stopped,
for it makes long pauses; sometimes such a faint whistling escapes one, one's own
blood is pounding all too loudly in one's ears; then two pauses come one after another,
and for a while one thinks that the whistling has stopped forever. I listen no longer, I
jump up, all life is transfigured; it is as if the fountains from which flows the silence of
the burrow were unsealed. I refrain from verifying my discovery at once, I want first to
find someone to whom in all good faith I can confide it, so I rush to the Castle Keep, I
remember, for I and everything in me has awakened to new life, that I have eaten
nothing for a long time, I snatch something or other from among my store of food
half-buried under the debris and hurriedly begin to swallow it while I hurry back to
the place where I made my incredible discovery, I only want to assure myself about it
incidentally, perfunctorily, while I am eating; I listen, but the most perfunctory
listening shows at once that I was shamefully deceived: away there in the distance the
whistling still remains unshaken. And I spit out my food, and would like to trample it
underfoot, and go back to my task, not caring which I take up; anyplace where it seems
to be needed, and there are enough places like that, I mechanically start on something
or other, just as if the overseer had appeared and I must make a pretense of working
for his benefit. But hardly have I begun to work in this fashion when it may happen
that I make a new discovery. The noise seems to have become louder, not much
louder, of course -- here it is always a matter of the subtlest shades -- but all the same
sufficiently louder for the ear to recognize it clearly. And this growing-louder is like a
coming-nearer; still more distinctly than you hear the increasing loudness of the noise,
you can literally see the step that brings it closer to you. You leap back from the wall,
you try to grasp at once all the possible consequences that this discovery will bring
with it. You feel as if you had never really organized the burrow for defense against
attack; you had intended to do so, but despite all your experience of life the danger of
an attack, and consequently the need to organize the place for defense, seemed remote
-- or rather not remote (how could it possibly be!) -- but infinitely less important than
the need to put it in a state where one could live peacefully; and so that consideration
$ 378
was given priority in everything relating to the burrow. Many things in this direction
might have been done without affecting the plan of the whole; most incomprehensibly
they have been neglected. I have had a great deal of luck all those years, luck has
spoiled me; I have had anxieties, but anxiety leads to nothing when you have luck to
back you.
 The thing to do, really to do now, would be to go carefully over the burrow and
consider every possible means of defending it, work out a plan of defense and a
corresponding plan of construction, and then start on the work at once with the vigor
of youth. That is the work that would really be needed, for which, I may add, it is now
far too late in the day; yet that is what would really be needed, and not the digging of a
grand experimental trench, whose only real result would be to deliver me hand and
foot to the search for danger, out of the foolish fear that it will not arrive quickly
enough of itself. Suddenly I cannot comprehend my former plan. I can find no
slightest trace of reason in what had seemed so reasonable; once more I lay aside my
work and even my listening; I have no wish to discover any further signs that the noise
is growing louder; I have had enough of discoveries; I let everything slide; I would be
quite content if I could only still the conflict going on within me. Once more I let my
passages lead me where they will, I come to more and more remote ones that I have
not yet seen since my return, and that are quite unsullied by my scratching paws, and
whose silence rises up to meet me and sinks into me. I do not surrender to it, I hurry
on, I do not know what I want, probably simply to put off the hour. I stray so far that I
find myself at the labyrinth; the idea of listening beneath the moss covering tempts
me; such distant things, distant for the moment, chain my interest. I push my way up
and listen. Deep stillness; how lovely it is here, outside there nobody troubles about
my burrow, everybody has his own affairs, which have no connection with me; how
have I managed to achieve this? Here under the moss covering is perhaps the only
place in my burrow now where I can listen for hours and hear nothing. A complete
reversal of things in the burrow; what was once the place of danger has become a place
of tranquility, while the Castle Keep has been plunged into the melee of the world and
$ 379
all its perils. Still worse, even here there is no peace in reality, here nothing has
changed; silent or vociferous, danger lies in ambush as before above the moss, but I
have grown insensitive to it, my mind is far too much taken up with the whistling in
my walls. Is my mind really taken up with it? It grows louder, it comes nearer, but I
wriggle my way through the labyrinth and make a couch for myself up here under the
moss; it is almost as if I were already leaving the house to the whistler, content if I can
only have a little peace up here. To the whistler? Have I come, then, to a new
conclusion concerning the cause of the noise? But surely the noise is caused by the
channels bored by the small fry? Is not that my considered opinion? It seems to me
that I have not retreated from it thus far. And if the noise is not caused directly by
these channels, it is indirectly. And even if it should have no connection with them
whatever, one is not at liberty to make a priori assumptions, but must wait until one
finds the cause, or it reveals itself. One could play with hypotheses, of course, even at
this stage; for instance, it is possible that there has been a water burst at some distance
away, and what seems a piping or whistling to me is in reality a gurgling. But apart
from the fact that I have no experience in that sphere -- the groundwater that I found
at the start I drained away at once, and in this sandy soil it has never returned -- apart
from this fact the noise is undeniably a whistling and simply not to be translated into a
gurgling. But what avail all exhortations to be calm; my imagination will not rest, and I
have actually come to believe -- it is useless to deny it to myself -- that the whistling is
made by some beast, and moreover not by a great many small ones, but by a single big
one. Many signs contradict this. The noise can be heard everywhere and always at the
same strength, and moreover uniformly, both by day and night. At first, therefore, one
cannot but incline to the hypothesis of a great number of little animals; but as I must
have found some of them during my digging and I have found nothing, it only remains
for me to assume the existence of a great beast, especially as the things that seem to
contradict the hypothesis are merely things which make the beast, not so much
impossible, as merely dangerous beyond all one's powers of conception. For that
reason alone have I resisted this hypothesis. I shall cease from this self-deception. For
a long time already I have played with the idea that the beast can be heard at such a
$ 380
great distance because it works so furiously; it burrows as fast through the ground as
another can walk on the open road; the ground still trembles at its burrowing when it
has ceased; this reverberation and the noise of the boring itself unite into one sound at
such a great distance, and I, as I hear only the last dying ebb of that sound, hear it
always at the same uniform strength. It follows from this also that the beast is not
making for me, seeing that the noise never changes; more likely it has a plan in view
whose purpose I cannot decipher; I merely assume that the beast -- and I make no
claim whatever that it knows of my existence -- is encircling me; it has probably made
several circles around my burrow already since I began to observe it. The nature of the
noise, the piping or whistling, gives me much food for thought. When I scratch and
scrape in the soil in my own fashion the sound is quite different. I can explain the
whistling only in this way: that the beast's chief means of burrowing is not its claws,
which it probably employs merely as a secondary resource, but its snout or its muzzle,
which, of course, apart from its enormous strength, must also be fairly sharp at the
point. It probably bores its snout into the earth with one mighty push and tears out a
great lump; while it is doing that I hear nothing; that is the pause; but then it draws in
the air for a new push. This indrawal of its breath, which must be an earthshaking
noise, not only because of the beast's strength, but of its haste, its furious lust for work
as well: this noise I hear then as a faint whistling. But quite incomprehensible remains
the beast's capacity to work without stopping; perhaps the short pauses provide also
the opportunity of snatching a moment's rest; but apparently the beast has never yet
allowed itself a really long rest, day and night it goes on burrowing, always with the
same freshness and vigor, always thinking of its object, which must be achieved with
the utmost expedition, and which it has the ability to achieve with ease. Now I could
not have foreseen such an opponent. But apart altogether from the beast's peculiar
characteristics, what is happening now is only something which I should really have
feared all the time, something against which I should have been constantly prepared:
the fact that someone would come. By what chance can everything have flowed on so
quietly and happily for such a long time? Who can have diverted my enemies from
their path, and forced them to make a wide detour around my property? Why have I
$ 381
been spared for so long, only to be delivered to such terrors now? Compared with this,
what are all the petty dangers in brooding over which I have spent my life! Had I
hoped, as owner of the burrow, to be in a stronger position than any enemy who might
chance to appear? But simply by virtue of being owner of this great vulnerable edifice I
am obviously defenseless against any serious attack. The joy of possessing it has
spoiled me, the vulnerability of the burrow has made me vulnerable; any wound to it
hurts me as if I myself were hit. It is precisely this that I should have foreseen; instead
of thinking only of my own defense -- and how perfunctorily and vainly I have done
even that -- I should have thought of the defense of the burrow. Above all, provision
should have been made for cutting off sections of the burrow, and as many as possible
of them, from the endangered sections when they are attacked; this should have been
done by means of improvised landslides, calculated to operate at a moment's notice;
moreover these should have been so thick, and have provided such an effectual barrier,
that the attacker would not even guess that the real burrow only began at the other
side. More, these landslides should have been so devised that they not only concealed
the burrow, but also entombed the attacker. Not the slightest attempt have I made to
carry out such a plan, nothing at all has been done in this direction, I have been as
thoughtless as a child, I have passed my manhood's years in childish games, I have
done nothing but play even with the thought of danger, I have shirked really taking
thought for actual danger. And there has been no lack of warning.
 Nothing, of course, approaching the present situation has happened before;
nevertheless there was an incident not unlike it when the burrow was only beginning.
The main difference between that time and this is simply that the burrow was only
beginning then. . . In those days I was literally nothing more than a humble apprentice,
the labyrinth was only sketched out in rough outline, I had already dug a little room,
but the proportions and the execution of the walls were sadly bungled; in short,
everything was so tentative that it could only be regarded as an experiment, as
something which, if one lost patience some day, one could leave behind without much
regret. Then one day as I lay on a heap of earth resting from my labors -- I have rested
$ 382
far too often from my labors all my life -- suddenly I heard a noise in the distance.
Being young at the time, I was less frightened than curious. I left my work to look after
itself and set myself to listen; I listened and listened, and had no wish to fly up to my
moss covering and stretch myself out there so that I might not have to hear. I did
listen, at least. I could clearly recognize that the noise came from some kind of
burrowing similar to my own; it was somewhat fainter, of course, but how much of
that might be put down to the distance one could not tell. I was intensely interested,
but otherwise calm and cool. Perhaps I am in somebody else's burrow, I thought to
myself, and now the owner is boring his way toward me. If that assumption had
proved to be correct I would have gone away, for I have never had any desire for
conquest or bloodshed, and begun building somewhere else. But after all I was still
young and still without a burrow, so I could remain quite cool. Besides, the further
course of the noise brought no real cause for apprehension, except that it was not easy
to explain. If whoever was boring there was really making for me, because he had
heard me boring, then if he changed his direction, as now actually happened, it could
not be told whether he did this because my pause for rest had deprived him of any
definite point to make toward, or because -- which was more plausible -- he had
himself changed his plans. But perhaps I had been deceived altogether, and he had
never been actually making in my direction; at any rate the noise grew louder for a
while as if he were drawing nearer, and being young at that time I probably would not
have been displeased to see the burrower suddenly rising from the ground; but
nothing of that kind happened, at a certain point the sound of boring began to weaken,
it grew fainter and fainter, as if the burrower were gradually diverging from his first
route, and suddenly it broke off altogether, as if he had decided now to take the
diametrically opposite direction and were making straight away from me into the
distance. For a long time I still went on listening for him in the silence, before I
returned once more to my work. Now that warning was definite enough, but I soon
forgot it, and it scarcely influenced my building plans.
 Between that day and this lie my years of maturity, but is it not as if there were
$ 383
no interval at all between them? I still take long rests from my labors and listen at the
wall, and the burrower has changed his intention anew, he has turned back, he is
returning from his journey, thinking he has given me ample time in the interval to
prepare for his reception. But on my side everything is worse prepared for than it was
then; the great burrow stands defenseless, and I am no longer a young apprentice, but
an old architect, and the powers I still have fail me when the decisive hour comes; yet
old as I am it seems to me that I would gladly be still older, so old that I should never
be able to rise again from my resting place under the moss. For to be honest I cannot
endure the place, I rise up and rush, as if I had filled myself up there with new
anxieties instead of peace, down into the house again. What was the state of things the
last time I was here? Had the whistling grown fainter? No, it had grown louder. I listen
at ten places chosen at random and clearly notice the deception; the whistling is just
the same as ever, nothing has altered. Over there, there are no changes, there one is
calm and not worried about time; but here every instant frets and gnaws at the
listener. I go once more the long road to the Castle Keep, all my surroundings seem
filled with agitation, seem to be looking at me, and then look away again so as not to
disturb me, yet cannot refrain the very next moment from trying to read the saving
solution from my expression. I shake my head, I have not yet found any solution. Nor
do I go to the Castle Keep in pursuance of any plan. I pass the spot where I had
intended to begin the experimental trench, I look it over once more, it would have
been an admirable place to begin at, the trench's course would have been in the
direction where lay the majority of the tiny ventilation holes, which would have greatly
lightened my labors; perhaps I should not have had to dig very far, should not even
have had to dig to the source of the noise; perhaps if I had listened at the ventilation
holes it would have been enough. But no consideration is potent enough to animate
me to this labor of digging. This trench will bring me certainty, you say? I have
reached the stage where I no longer wish to have certainty. In the Castle Keep I choose
a lovely piece of flayed red flesh and creep with it into one of the heaps of earth; there I
shall have silence at least, such silence, at any rate, as still can be said to exist here. I
munch and nibble at the flesh, think of the strange beast going its own road in the
$ 384
distance, and then again that I should enjoy my store of food as fully as possible, while
I still have the chance. This last is probably the sole plan I have left that I can carry out.
For the rest I try to unriddle the beast's plans. Is it on its wanderings, or is it working
on its own burrow? If it is on its wanderings then perhaps an understanding with it
might be possible. If it should really break through to the burrow I shall give it some of
my stores and it will go on its way again. It will go its way again, a fine story! Lying in
my heap of earth I can naturally dream of all sorts of things, even of an understanding
with the beast, though I know well enough that no such thing can happen, and that at
the instant when we see each other, more, at the moment when we merely guess at
each other's presence, we shall both blindly bare our claws and teeth, neither of us a
second before or after the other, both of us filled with a new and different hunger,
even if we should already be gorged to bursting. And with entire justice, for who, even
if he were merely on his wanderings, would not change his itinerary and his plans for
the future on catching sight of the burrow? But perhaps the beast is digging in its own
burrow, in which case I cannot even dream of an understanding. Even if it should be
such a peculiar beast that its burrow could tolerate a neighbor, my burrow could not
tolerate a neighbor, at least not a clearly audible one. Now actually the beast seems to
be a great distance away; if it would only withdraw a little farther the noise too would
probably disappear; perhaps in that case everything would be peaceful again as in the
old days; all this would then become a painful but salutary lesson, spurring me on to
make the most diverse improvements on the burrow; if I have peace, and danger does
not immediately threaten me, I am still quite fit for all sorts of hard work; perhaps,
considering the enormous possibilities which its powers of work open before it, the
beast has given up the idea of extending'its burrow in my direction, and is
compensating itself for that in some other one. That consummation also cannot, of
course, be brought about by negotiation, but only by the beast itself, or by some
compulsion exercised from my side. In both cases the decisive factor will be whether
the beast knows about me, and if so what it knows. The more I reflect upon it the
more improbable does it seem to me that the beast has even heard me; it is possible,
though I can't imagine it, that it can have received news of me in some other way, but
$ 385
it has certainly never heard me. So long as I still knew nothing about it, it simply
cannot have heard me, for at that time I kept very quiet, nothing could be more quiet
than my return to the burrow; afterwards, when I dug the experimental trenches,
perhaps it could have heard me, though my style of digging makes very little noise; but
if it had heard me I must have noticed some sign of it, the beast must at least have
stopped its work every now and then to listen. But all remained unchanged.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Josephine the Singer,
or the Mouse Folk
 OUR SINGER is called Josephine. Anyone who has not heard her does not know
the power of song. There is no one but is carried away by her singing, a tribute all the
greater as we are not in general a music-loving race. Tranquil peace is the music we
love best; our life is hard, we are no longer able, even on occasions when we have tried
to shake off the cares of daily life, to rise to anything so high and remote from our
$ 386
usual routine as music. But we do not much lament that; we do not get even so far; a
certain practical cunning, which admittedly we stand greatly in need of, we hold to be
our greatest distinction, and with a smile born of such cunning we are wont to console
ourselves for all shortcomings, even supposing -- only it does not happen -- that we
were to yearn once in a way for the kind of bliss which music may provide. Josephine is
the sole exception; she has a love for music and knows too how to transmit it; she is
the only one; when she dies, music -- who knows for how long -- will vanish from our
lives.
 I have often thought about what this music of hers really means. For we are
quite unmusical; how is it that we understand Josephine's singing or, since Josephine
denies that, at least think we can understand it. The simplest answer would be that the
beauty of her singing is so great that even the most insensitive cannot be deaf to it, but
this answer is not satisfactory. If it were really so, her singing would have to give one
an immediate and lasting feeling of being something out of the ordinary, a feeling that
from her throat something is sounding which we have never heard before and which
we are not even capable of hearing, something that Josephine alone and no one else
can enable us to hear. But in my opinion that is just what does not happen, I do not
feel this and have never observed that others feel anything of the kind. Among
intimates we admit freely to one another that Josephine's singing, as singing, is
nothing out of the ordinary.
 Is it in fact singing at all? Although we are unmusical we have a tradition of
singing; in the old days our people did sing; this is mentioned in legends and some
songs have actually survived, which, it is true, no one can now sing. Thus we have an
inkling of what singing is, and Josephine's art does not really correspond to it. So is it
singing at all? Is it not perhaps just a piping? And piping is something we all know
about, it is the real artistic accomplishment of our people, or rather no mere
accomplishment but a characteristic expression of our life. We all pipe, but of course
no one dreams of making out that our piping is an art, we pipe without thinking of it,
$ 387
indeed without noticing it, and there are even many among us who are quite unaware
that piping is one of our characteristics. So if it were true that Josephine does not sing
but only pipes and perhaps, as it seems to me at least, hardly rises above the level of
our usual piping -- yet, perhaps her strength is not even quite equal to our usual
piping, whereas an ordinary farmhand can keep it up effortlessly all day long, besides
doing his work -- if that were all true, then indeed Josephine's alleged vocal skill might
be disproved, but that would merely clear the ground for the real riddle which needs
solving, the enormous influence she has.
 After all, it is only a kind of piping that she produces. If you post yourself quite
far away from her and listen, or, still better, put your judgment to the test, whenever
she happens to be singing along with others, by trying to identify her voice, you will
undoubtedly distinguish nothing but a quite ordinary piping tone, which at most
differs a little from the others through being delicate or weak. Yet if you sit down
before her, it is not merely a piping; to comprehend her art it is necessary not only to
hear but to see her. Even if hers were only our usual workaday piping, there is first of
all this peculiarity to consider, that here is someone making a ceremonial performance
out of doing the usual thing. To crack a nut is truly no feat, so no one would ever dare
to collect an audience in order to entertain it with nut-cracking. But if all the same one
does do that and succeeds in entertaining the public, then it cannot be a matter of
simple nut-cracking. Or it is a matter of nut-cracking, but it turns out that we have
overlooked the art of cracking nuts because we were too skilled in it and that this
newcomer to it first shows us its real nature, even finding it useful in making his
effects to be rather less expert in nut-cracking than most of us.
 Perhaps it is much the same with Josephine's singing; we admire in her what we
do not at all admire in ourselves; in this respect, I may say, she is of one mind with us. I
was once present when someone, as of course often happens, drew her attention to the
folk piping everywhere going on, making only a modest reference to it, yet for
Josephine that was more than enough. A smile so sarcastic and arrogant as she then
$ 388
assumed I have never seen; she, who in appearance is delicacy itself, conspicuously so
even among our people who are prolific in such feminine types, seemed at that
moment actually vulgar; she was at once aware of it herself, by the way, with her
extreme sensibility, and controlled herself. At any rate she denies any connection
between her art and ordinary piping. For those who are of the contrary opinion she
has only contempt and probably unacknowledged hatred. This is not simple vanity, for
the opposition, with which I too am half in sympathy, certainly admires her no less
than the crowd does, but Josephine does not want mere admiration, she wants to be
admired exactly in the way she prescribes, mere admiration leaves her cold. And when
you take a seat before her, you understand her; opposition is possible only at a
distance, when you sit before her, you know: this piping of hers is no piping.
 Since piping is one of our thoughtless habits, one might think that people
would pipe up in Josephine's audience too; her art makes us feel happy, and when we
are happy we pipe; but her audience never pipes, it sits in mouselike stillness; as if we
had become partakers in the peace we long for, from which our own piping at the very
least holds us back, we make no sound. Is it her singing that enchants us or is it not
rather the solemn stillness enclosing her frail little voice? Once it happened while
Josephine was singing that some silly little thing in all innocence began to pipe up too.
Now it was just the same as what we were hearing from Josephine; in front of us the
piping sound that despite all rehearsal was still tentative and here in the audience the
unselfconscious piping of a child; it would have been impossible to define the
difference; but yet at once we hissed and whistled the interrupter down, although it
would not really have been necessary, for in any case she would certainly have crawled
away in fear and shame, whereas Josephine struck up her most triumphal notes and
was quite beyond herself, spreading her arms wide and stretching her throat as high as
it could reach.
 That is what she is like always, every trifle, every casual incident, every
nuisance, a creaking in the parquet, a grinding of teeth, a failure in the lighting incites
$ 389
her to heighten the effectiveness of her song; she believes anyhow that she is singing to
deaf ears; there is no lack of enthusiasm and applause, but she has long learned not to
expect real understanding, as she conceives it. So all disturbance is very welcome to
her; whatever intervenes from outside to hinder the purity of her song, to be overcome
with a slight effort, even with no effort at all, merely by confronting it, can help to
awaken the masses, to teach them not perhaps understanding but awed respect.
 And if small events do her such service, how much more do great ones. Our life
is very uneasy, every day brings surprises, apprehensions, hopes, and terrors, so that it
would be impossible for a single individual to bear it all did he not always have by day
and night the support of his fellows; but even so it often becomes very difficult;
frequently as many as a thousand shoulders are trembling under a burden that was
really meant only for one pair. Then Josephine holds that her time has come. So there
she stands, the delicate creature, shaken by vibrations especially below the breastbone,
so that one feels anxious for her, it is as if she has concentrated all her strength on her
song, as if from everything in her that does not directly subserve her singing all
strength has been withdrawn, almost all power of life, as if she were laid bare,
abandoned, committed merely to the care of good angels, as if while she is so wholly
withdrawn and living only in her song a cold breath blowing upon her might kill her.
But just when she makes such an appearance, we who are supposed to be her
opponents are in the habit of saying: "She can't even pipe; she has to put such a terrible
strain on herself to force out not a song -- we can't call it song -- but some
approximation to our usual customary piping." So it seems to us, but this impression
although, as I said, inevitable is yet fleeting and transient. We too are soon sunk in the
feeling of the mass, which, warmly pressed body to body, listens with indrawn breath.
 And to gather around her this mass of our people who are almost always on the
run and scurrying hither and thither for reasons that are often not very clear,
Josephine mostly needs to do nothing else than take up her stand, head thrown back,
mouth half-open, eyes turned upwards, in the position that indicates her intention to
$ 390
sing. She can do this where she likes, it need not be a place visible a long way off, any
secluded corner pitched on in a moment's caprice will serve as well. The news that she
is going to sing flies around at once and soon whole processions are on the way there.
Now, sometimes, all the same, obstacles intervene, Josephine likes best to sing just
when things are most upset, many worries and dangers force us then to take devious
ways, with the best will in the world we cannot assemble ourselves as quickly as
Josephine wants, and on occasion she stands there in ceremonial state for quite a time
without a sufficient audience -- then indeed she turns furious, then she stamps her
feet, swearing in most unmaidenly fashion; she actually bites. But even such behavior
does no harm to her reputation; instead of curbing a little her excessive demands,
people exert themselves to meet them; messengers are sent out to summon fresh
hearers; she is kept in ignorance of the fact that this is being done; on the roads all
around sentries can be seen posted who wave on newcomers and urge them to hurry;
this goes on until at last a tolerably large audience is gathered.
 What drives the people to make such exertions for Josephine's sake? This is no
easier to answer than the first question about Josephine's singing, with which it is
closely connected. One could eliminate that and combine them both in the second
question, if it were possible to assert that because of her singing our people are
unconditionally devoted to Josephine. But this is simply not the case; unconditional
devotion is hardly known among us; ours are people who love slyness beyond
everything, without any malice, to be sure, and childish whispering and chatter,
innocent, superficial chatter, to be sure, but people of such a kind cannot go in for
unconditional devotion, and that Josephine herself certainly feels, that is what she is
fighting against with all the force of her feeble throat.
 In making such generalized pronouncements, of course, one should not go too
far, our people are all the same devoted to Josephine, only not unconditionally. For
instance, they would not be capable of laughing at Josephine. It can be admitted: in
Josephine there is much to make one laugh; and laughter for its own sake is never far
$ 391
away from us; in spite of all the misery of our lives quiet laughter is always, so to speak,
at our elbows; but we do not laugh at Josephine. Many a time I have had the
impression that our people interpret their relationship to Josephine in this way, that
she, this frail creature, needing protection and in some way remarkable, in her own
opinion remarkable for her gift of song, is entrusted to their care and they must look
after her; the reason for this is not clear to anyone, only the fact seems to be
established. But what is entrusted to one's care one does not laugh at; to laugh would
be a breach of duty; the utmost malice which the most malicious of us wreak on
Josephine is to say now and then: "The sight of Josephine is enough to make one stop
laughing."
 So the people look after Josephine much as a father takes into his care a child
whose little hand -- one cannot tell whether in appeal or command -- is stretched out
to him. One might think that our people are not fitted to exercise such paternal duties,
but in reality they discharge them, at least in this case, admirably; no single individual
could do what in this respect the people as a whole are capable of doing. To be sure,
the difference in strength between the people and the individual is so enormous that it
is enough for the nursling to be drawn into the warmth of their nearness and he is
sufficiently protected. To Josephine, certainly, one does not dare mention such ideas.
"Your protection isn't worth an old song," she says then. Sure, sure, old song, we think.
And besides her protest is no real contradiction, it is rather a thoroughly childish way
of doing, and childish gratitude, while a father's way of doing is to pay no attention to
it.
 Yet there is something else behind it which is not so easy to explain by this
relationship between the people and Josephine. Josephine, that is to say, thinks just the
opposite, she believes it is she who protects the people. When we are in a bad way
politically or economically, her singing is supposed to save us, nothing less than that,
and if it does not drive away the evil, at least gives us the strength to bear it. She does
not put it in these words or in any other, she says very little anyhow, she is silent
$ 392
among the chatterers, but it flashes from her eyes, on her closed lips -- few among us
can keep their lips closed, but she can -- it is plainly legible. Whenever we get bad
news -- and on many days bad news comes thick and fast at once, lies and half-truths
included -- she rises up at once, whereas usually she sits listlessly on the ground, she
rises up and stretches her neck and tries to see over the heads of her flock like a
shepherd before a thunderstorm. It is certainly a habit of children, in their wild,
impulsive fashion, to make such claims, but Josephine's are not quite so unfounded as
children's. True, she does not save us and she gives us no strength; it is easy to stage
oneself as a savior of our people, inured as they are to suffering, not sparing
themselves, swift in decision, well acquainted with death, timorous only to the eye in
the atmosphere of reckless daring which they constantly breathe, and as prolific
besides as they are bold -- it is easy, I say, to stage oneself after the event as the savior
of our people, who have always somehow managed to save themselves, although at the
cost of sacrifices which make historians -- generally speaking we ignore historical
research entirely -- quite horror-struck. And yet it is true that just in emergencies we
hearken better than at other times to Josephine's voice. The menaces that loom over
us make us quieter, more humble, more submissive to Josephine's domination; we like
to come together, we like to huddle close to each other, especially on an occasion set
apart from the troubles preoccupying us; it is as if we were drinking in all haste -- yes,
haste is necessary, Josephine too often forgets that -- from a cup of peace in common
before the battle, It is not so much a performance of songs as an assembly of the
people, and an assembly where except for the small piping voice in front there is
complete stillness; the hour is much too grave for us to waste it in chatter.
 A relationship of this kind, of course, would never content Josephine. Despite
all the nervous uneasiness that fills Josephine because her position has never been
quite defined, there is still much that she does not see, blinded by her self-conceit, and
she can be brought fairly easily to overlook much more, a swarm of flatterers is always
busy about her to this end, thus really doing a public service -- and yet to be only an
incidental, unnoticed performer in a corner of an assembly of the people, for that,
$ 393
although in itself it would be no small thing, she would certainly not make us the
sacrifice of her singing.
 Nor does she need to, for her art does not go unnoticed. Although we are at
bottom preoccupied with quite other things and it is by no means only for the sake of
her singing that stillness prevails and many a listener does not even look up but buries
his face in his neighbor's fur, so that Josephine up in front seems to be exerting herself
to no purpose, there is yet something -- it cannot be denied -- that irresistibly makes
its way into us from Josephine's piping. This piping, which rises up where everyone
else is pledged to silence, comes almost like a message from the whole people to each
individual; Josephine's thin piping amidst grave decisions is almost like our people's
precarious existence amidst the tumult of a hostile world. Josephine exerts herself, a
mere nothing in voice, a mere nothing in execution, she asserts herself and gets across
to us; it does us good to think of that. A really trained singer, if ever such a one should
be found among us, we could certainly not endure at such a time and we should
unanimously turn away from the senselessness of any such performance. May
Josephine be spared from perceiving that the mere fact of our listening to her is proof
that she is no singer. An intuition of it she must have, else why does she so
passionately deny that we do listen, only she keeps on singing and piping her intuition
away.
 But there are other things she could take comfort from: we do really listen to
her in a sense, probably much as one listens to a trained singer; she gets effects which a
trained singer would try in vain to achieve among us and which are only produced
precisely because her means are so inadequate. For this, doubtless, our way of life is
mainly responsible.
 Among our people there is no age of youth, scarcely the briefest childhood.
Regularly, it is true, demands are put forward that the children should be granted a
special freedom, a special protection, that their right to be a little carefree, to have a
$ 394
little senseless giddiness, a little play, that this right should be respected and the
exercise of it encouraged; such demands are put forward and nearly everyone approves
them, there is nothing one could approve more, but there is also nothing, in the reality
of our daily life, that is less likely to be granted, one approves these demands, one
makes attempts to meet them, but soon all the old ways are back again. Our life
happens to be such that a child, as soon as it can run about a little and a little
distinguish one thing from another, must look after itself just like an adult; the areas
on which, for economic reasons, we have to live in dispersion are too wide, our
enemies too numerous, the dangers lying everywhere in wait for us too incalculable --
we cannot shelter our children from the struggle for existence, if we did so, it would
bring them to an early grave. These depressing considerations are reinforced by
another, which is not depressing: the fertility of our race. One generation -- and each
is numerous -- treads on the heels of another, the children have no time to be
children. Other races may foster their children carefully, schools may be erected for
their little ones, out of these schools the children may come pouring daily, the future
of the race, yet among them it is always the same children that come out day after day
for a long time. We have no schools, but from our race come pouring at the briefest
intervals the innumerable swarms of our children, merrily lisping or chirping so long
as they cannot yet pipe, rolling or tumbling along by sheer impetus so long as they
cannot yet run, clumsily carrying everything before them by mass weight so long as
they cannot yet see, our children! And not the same children, as in those schools, no,
always new children again and again, without end, without a break, hardly does a child
appear than it is no more a child, while behind it new childish faces are already
crowding so fast and so thick that they are indistinguishable, rosy with happiness.
Truly, however delightful this may be and however much others may envy us for it,
and rightly, we simply cannot give a real childhood to our children. And that has its
consequences. A kind of unexpended, ineradicable childishness pervades our people;
in direct opposition to what is best in us, our infallible practical common sense, we
often behave with the utmost foolishness, with exactly the same foolishness as
children, senselessly, wastefully, grandiosely, irresponsibly, and all that often for the
$ 395
sake of some trivial amusement. And although our enjoyment of it cannot of course be
so wholehearted as a child's enjoyment, something of this survives in it without a
doubt. From this childishness of our people Josephine too has profited since the
beginning.
 Yet our people are not only childish, we are also in a sense prematurely old.
Childhood and old age come upon us not as upon others. We have no youth, we are all
at once grown-up, and then we stay grown-up too long, a certain weariness and
hopelessness spreading from that leaves a broad trail through our people's nature,
tough and strong in hope that it is in general, our lack of musical gifts has surely some
connection with this; we are too old for music, its excitement, its rapture do not suit
our heaviness, wearily we wave it away; we content ourselves with piping; a little
piping here and there, that is enough for us. Who knows, there may be talents for
music among us; but if there were, the character of our people would suppress them
before they could unfold. Josephine on the other hand can pipe as much as she will, or
sing or whatever she likes to call it, that does not disturb us, that suits us, that we can
well put up with; any music there may be in it is reduced to the least possible trace; a
certain tradition of music is preserved, yet without making the slightest demand upon
us.
 But our people, being what they are, get still more than this from Josephine. At
her concerts, especially in times of stress, it is only the very young who are interested
in her singing as singing, they alone gaze in astonishment as she purses her lips, expels
the air between her pretty front teeth, half dies in sheer wonderment at the sounds she
herself is producing and after such a swooning swells her performance to new and
more incredible heights, whereas the real mass of the people -- this is plain to see --
are quite withdrawn into themselves. Here in the brief intervals between their
struggles our people dream, it is as if the limbs of each were loosened, as if the harried
individual once in a while could relax and stretch himself at ease in the great, warm
bed of the community. And into these dreams Josephine's piping drops note by note;
$ 396
she calls it pearl-like, we call it staccato; but at any rate here it is in its right place, as
nowhere else, finding the moment wait for it as music scarcely ever does. Something
of our poor brief childhood is in it, something of lost happiness that can never be
found again, but also something of active daily life, of its small gaieties, unaccountable
and yet springing up and not to be obliterated. And indeed this is all expressed not in
full round tones but softly, in whispers, confidentially, sometimes a little hoarsely. Of
course it is a kind of piping. Why not? Piping is our people's daily speech, only many a
one pipes his whole life long and does not know it, where here piping is set free from
the fetters of daily life and it sets us free too for a little while. We certainly should not
want to do without these performances.
 But from that point it is a long, long way to Josephine's claim that she gives us
new strength and so on and so forth. For ordinary people, at least, not for her train of
flatterers. "What other explanation could there be?" -- they say with quite shameless
sauciness -- "how else could you explain the great audiences, especially when danger is
most imminent, which have even often enough hindered proper precautions being
taken in time to avert danger." Now, this last statement is unfortunately true, but can
hardly be counted as one of Josephine's titles to fame, especially considering that when
such large gatherings have been unexpectedly flushed by the enemy and many of our
people left lying for dead, Josephine, who was responsible for it all, and indeed perhaps
attracted the enemy by her piping, has always occupied the safest place and was always
the first to whisk away quietly and speedily under cover of her escort. Still, everyone
really knows that, and yet people keep running to whatever place Josephine decides on
next, at whatever time she rises up to sing. One could argue from this that Josephine
stands almost beyond the law, that she can do what she pleases, at the risk of actually
endangering the community, and will be forgiven for everything. If this were so, even
Josephine's claims would be entirely comprehensible, yes, in this freedom to be
allowed her, this extraordinary gift granted to her and to no one else in direct
contravention of the laws, one could see an admission of the fact that the people do
not understand Josephine, just as she alleges, that they marvel helplessly at her art, feel
$ 397
themselves unworthy of it, try to assuage the pity she rouses in them by making really
desperate sacrifices for her and, to the same extent that her art is beyond their
comprehension, consider her personality and her wishes to lie beyond their
jurisdiction. Well, that is simply not true at all, perhaps as individuals the people may
surrender too easily to Josephine, but as a whole they surrender unconditionally to no
one, and not to her either.
 For a long time back, perhaps since the very beginning of her artistic career,
Josephine has been fighting for exemption from all daily work on account of her
singing; she should be relieved of all responsibility for earning her daily bread and
being involved in the general struggle for existence, which -- apparently -- should be
transferred on her behalf to the people as a whole. A facile enthusiast -- and there have
been such -- might argue from the mere unusualness of this demand, from the
spiritual attitude needed to frame such a demand, that it has an inner justification. But
our people draw other conclusions and quietly refuse it. Nor do they trouble much
about disproving the assumptions on which it is based. Josephine argues, for instance,
that the strain of working is bad for her voice, that the strain of working is of course
nothing to the strain of singing, but it prevents her from being able to rest sufficiently
after singing and to recuperate for more singing, she has to exhaust her strength
completely and yet, in these circumstances, can never rise to the peak of her abilities.
The people listen to her arguments and pay no attention. Our people, so easily moved,
sometimes cannot be moved at all. Their refusal is sometimes so decided that even
Josephine is taken aback, she appears to submit, does her proper share of work, sings
as best she can, but all only for a time, then with renewed strength -- for this purpose
her strength seems inexhaustible -- she takes up the fight again.
 Now it is clear that what Josephine really wants is not what she puts into
words. She is honorable, she is not work-shy, shirking in any case is quite unknown
among us, if her petition were granted she would certainly live the same life as before,
her work would not at all get in the way of her singing nor would her singing grow any
$ 398
better -- what she wants is public, unambiguous, permanent recognition of her art,
going far beyond any precedent so far known. But while almost everything else seems
within her reach, this eludes her persistently. Perhaps she should have taken a
different line of attack from the beginning, perhaps she herself sees that her approach
was wrong, but now she cannot draw back, retreat would be self-betrayal, now she
must stand or fall by her petition.
 If she really had enemies, as she avers, they could get much amusement from
watching this struggle, without having to lift a finger. But she has no enemies, and
even though she is often criticized here and there, no one finds this struggle of hers
amusing. Just because of the fact that the people show themselves here in their cold,
judicial aspect, which is otherwise rarely seen among us. And however one may
approve it in this case, the very idea that such an aspect might be turned upon oneself
some day prevents amusement from breaking in. The important thing, both in the
people's refusal and in Josephine's petition, is not the action itself, but the fact that the
people are capable of presenting a stony, impenetrable front to one of their own, and
that it is all the more impenetrable because in other respects they show an anxious
paternal care, and more than paternal care, for this very member of the people.
 Suppose that instead of the people one had an individual to deal with: one
might imagine that this man had been giving in to Josephine all the time while nursing
a wild desire to put an end to his submissiveness one fine day; that he had made
superhuman sacrifices for Josephine in the firm belief that there was a natural limit to
his capacity for sacrifice; yes, that he had sacrificed more than was needful merely to
hasten the process, merely to spoil Josephine and encourage her to ask for more and
more until she did indeed reach the limit with this last petition of hers; and that he
then cut her off with a final refusal which was curt because long held in reserve. Now,
this is certainly not how the matter stands, the people have no need of such guile,
besides, their respect for Josephine is well tried and genuine, and Josephine's demands
are after all so far-reaching that any simple child could have told her what the
$ 399
outcome would be; yet it may be that such considerations enter into Josephine's way of
taking the matter and so add a certain bitterness to the pain of being refused.
 But whatever her ideas on the subject, she does not let them deter her from
pursuing the campaign. Recently she has even intensified her attack; hitherto she has
used only words as her weapons but now she is beginning to have recourse to other
means, which she thinks will prove more efficacious but which we think will run her
into greater dangers.
 Many believe that Josephine is becoming so insistent because she feels herself
growing old and her voice falling off, and so she thinks it high time to wage the last
battle for recognition. I do not believe it. Josephine would not be Josephine if that were
true. For her there is no growing old and no falling off in her voice. If she makes
demands it is not because of outward circumstances but because of an inner logic. She
reaches for the highest garland not because it is momentarily hanging a little lower but
because it is the highest; if she had any say in the matter she would have it still higher.
 This contempt for external difficulties, to be sure, does not hinder her from
using the most unworthy methods. Her rights seem beyond question to her; so what
does it matter how she secures them; especially since in this world, as she sees it,
honest methods are bound to fail. Perhaps that is why she has transferred the battle
for her rights from the field of song to another which she cares little about. Her
supporters have let it be known that, according to herself, she feels quite capable of
singing in such a way that all levels of the populace, even to the remotest corners of
the opposition, would find it a real delight, a real delight not by popular standards, for
the people affirm that they have always delighted in her singing, but a delight by her
own standards. However, she adds, since she cannot falsify the highest standards nor
pander to the lowest, her singing will have to stay as it is. But when it comes to her
campaign for exemption from work, we get a different story; it is of course also a
campaign on behalf of her singing, yet she is not fighting directly with the priceless
$ 400
weapon of her song, so any instrument she uses is good enough. Thus, for instance,
the rumor went around that Josephine meant to cut short her grace notes if her
petition were not granted. I know nothing about grace notes, and have never noticed
any in Josephine's singing. But Josephine is going to cut short her grace notes, not, for
the present, to cut them out entirely, only to cut them short. Presumably she has
carried out her threat, although I for one have observed no difference in her
performance. The people as a whole listened in the usual way without making any
pronouncement on the grace notes, nor did their response to her petition vary by a jot.
It must be admitted that Josephine's way of thinking, like her figure, is often very
charming. And so, for instance, after that performance, just as if her decision about the
grace notes had been too severe or too sudden a move against the people, she
announced that next time she would put in all the grace notes again. Yet after the next
concert she changed her mind once more, there was to be definitely an end of these
great arias with the grace notes, and until her petition was favorably regarded they
would never recur. Well, the people let all these announcements, decisions and
counterdecisions go in at one ear and out at the other, like a grown-up person deep in
thought turning a deaf ear to a child's babble, fundamentally well disposed but not
accessible.
 Josephine, however, does not give in. The other day, for instance, she claimed
that she had hurt her foot at work, so that it was difficult for her to stand up to sing;
but since she could not sing except standing up, her songs would now have to be cut
short. Although she limps and leans on her supporters, no one believes that she is
really hurt. Granted that her frail body is extra sensitive, she is yet one of us and we are
a race of workers; if we were to start limping every time we got a scratch, the whole
people would never be done limping. Yet though she lets herself be led about like a
cripple, though she shows herself in this pathetic condition oftener than usual, the
people all the same listen to her singing thankfully and appreciatively as before, but do
not bother much about the shortening of her songs.
$ 401
 Since she cannot very well go on limping forever, she thinks of something else,
she pleads that she is tired, not in the mood for singing, feeling faint. And so we get a
theatrical performance as well as a concert. We see Josephine's supporters in the
background begging and imploring her to sing. She would be glad to oblige, but she
cannot. They comfort and caress her with flatteries, they almost carry her to the
selected spot where she is supposed to sing. At last, bursting inexplicably into tears,
she gives way, but when she stands up to sing, obviously at the end of her resources,
weary, her arms not widespread as usual but hanging lifelessly down, so that one gets
the impression that they are perhaps a little too short -- just as she is about to strike
up, there, she cannot do it after all, an unwilling shake of the head tells us so and she
breaks down before our eyes. To be sure, she pulls herself together again and sings, I
fancy, much as usual; perhaps, if one has an ear for the finer shades of expression, one
can hear that she is singing with unusual feeling, which is, however, all to the good.
And in the end she is actually less tired than before, with a firm tread, if one can use
such a term for her tripping gait, she moves off, refusing all help from her supporters
and measuring with cold eyes the crowd which respectfully makes way for her.
 That happened a day or two ago; but the latest is that she has disappeared, just
at a time when she was supposed to sing. It is not only her supporters who are looking
for her, many are devoting themselves to the search, but all in vain; Josephine has
vanished, she will not sing; she will not even be cajoled into singing, this time she has
deserted us entirely.
 Curious, how mistaken she is in her calculations, the clever creature, so
mistaken that one might fancy she has made no calculations at all but is only being
driven on by her destiny, which in our world cannot be anything but a sad one. Of her
own accord she abandons her singing, of her own accord she destroys the power she
has gained over people's hearts. How could she ever have gained that power, since she
knows so little about these hearts of ours? She hides herself and does not sing, but our
people, quietly, without visible disappointment, a self-confident mass in perfect
$ 402
equilibrium, so constituted, even though appearances are misleading, that they can
only bestow gifts and not receive them, even from Josephine, our people continue on
their way.
 Josephine's road, however, must go downhill. The time will soon come when
her last notes sound and die into silence. She is a small episode in the eternal history of
our people, and the people will get over the loss of her. Not that it will be easy for us;
how can our gatherings take place in utter silence? Still, were they not silent even
when Josephine was present? Was her actual piping notably louder and more alive
than the memory of it will be? Was it even in her lifetime more than a simple memory?
Was it not rather because Josephine's singing was already past losing in this way that
our people in their wisdom prized it so highly?
 So perhaps we shall not miss so very much after all, while Josephine, redeemed
from the earthly sorrows which to her thinking lay in wait for all chosen spirits, will
happily lose herself in the numberless throng of the heroes of our people, and soon,
since we are no historians, will rise to the heights of redemption and be forgotten like
all her brothers.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 403
THE SHORTER STORIES
Children on a Country Road
 I HEARD the wagons rumbling past the garden fence, sometimes I even saw
them through gently swaying gaps in the foliage. How the wood of their spokes and
shafts creaked in the summer heat! Laborers were coming from the fields and laughing
so that it was a scandal.
 I was sitting on our little swing, just resting among the trees in my parents'
garden.
 On the other side of the fence the traffic never stopped. Children's running feet
were past in a moment; harvest wagons with men and women perched on and around
the sheaves darkened the flower beds; toward evening I saw a gentleman slowly
promenading with a walking stick, and a couple of girls who met him arm in arm
stepped aside into the grass as they greeted him.
$ 404
 Then birds flew up as if in showers, I followed them with my eyes and saw how
high they soared in one breath, till I felt not that they were rising but that I was falling,
and holding fast to the ropes began to swing a little out of sheer weakness. Soon I was
swinging more strongly as the air blew colder and instead of soaring birds trembling
stars appeared.
 I was given my supper by candlelight. Often both my arms were on the wooden
board and I was already weary as I bit into my bread and butter. The coarse-mesh
window curtains bellied in the warm wind and many a time some passer-by outside
would stay them with his hands as if he wanted to see me better and speak to me.
Usually the candle soon went out and in the sooty candle smoke the assembled midges
went on circling for a while. If anyone asked me a question from the window I would
gaze at him as if at a distant mountain or into vacancy, nor did he particularly care
whether he got an answer or not. But if one jumped over the window sill and
announced that the others were already waiting, then I did get to my feet with a sigh.
 "What are you sighing for? What's wrong? Has something dreadful happened
that can never be made good? Shan't we ever recover from it? Is everything lost?"
 Nothing was lost. We ran to the front of the house. "Thank God, here you are
at last!" -- "You're always late!" -- "Why just me?" -- "Especially you, why don't you stay
at home if you don't want to come." -- "No quarter!" -- "No quarter? What kind of way
is that to talk?"
 We ran our heads full tilt into the evening. There was no daytime and no
nighttime. Now our waistcoat buttons would be clacking together like teeth, again we
would be keeping a steady distance from each other as we ran, breathing fire like wild
beasts in the tropics. Like cuirassiers in old wars, stamping and springing high, we
drove each other down the short alley and with this impetus in our legs a farther
stretch along the main road. Stray figures went into the ditch, hardly had they
vanished down the dusky escarpment when they were standing like newcomers on the
$ 405
field path above and looking down.
 "Come on down!" -- "Come on up first!" -- "So's you can push us down, no
thanks, we're not such fools." -- "You're afraid, you mean. Come on up, you cowards!" -
- "Afraid? Of the likes of you? You're going to push us down, are you? That's a good
one."
 We made the attempt and were pushed head over heels into the grass of the
roadside ditch, tumbling of our own free will. Everything was equably warm to us, we
felt neither warmth nor chill in the grass, only one got tired.
 Turning on one's right side, with a hand under the ear, one could easily have
fallen asleep there. But one wanted to get up again with chin uplifted, only to roll into
a deeper ditch. Then with an arm thrust out crosswise and legs threshing to the side
one thought to launch into the air again only to fall for certain into a still deeper ditch.
And of this one never wanted to make an end.
 How one might stretch oneself out, especially in the knees, properly to sleep in
the last ditch, was something scarcely thought of, and one simply lay on one's back,
like an invalid, inclined to weep a little. One blinked as now and then a youngster with
elbows pressed to his sides sprang over one's head with dark-looming soles, in a leap
from the escarpment to the roadway.
 The moon was already some way up in the sky, in its light a mail coach drove
past. A small wind began to blow everywhere, even in the ditch one could feel it, and
nearby the forest began to rustle. Then one was no longer so anxious to be alone.
 "Where are you?" -- "Come here!" -- "All together!" -- "What are you hiding for,
drop your nonsense!" -- "Don't you know the mail's gone past already?" -- "Not
already?" -- "Of course; it went past while you were sleeping." -- "I wasn't sleeping.
What an idea!" -- "Oh shut up, you're still half asleep." -- "But I wasn't." -- "Come on!"
$ 406
 We ran bunched more closely together, many of us linked hands, one's head
could not be held high enough, for now the way was downhill. Someone whooped an
Indian war cry, our legs galloped us as never before, the wind lifted our hips as we
sprang. Nothing could have checked us; we were in such full stride that even in
overtaking others we could fold our arms and look quietly around us.
 At the bridge over the brook we came to a stop; those who had overrun it came
back. The water below lapped against stones and roots as if it were not already late
evening. There was no reason why one of us should not jump onto the parapet of the
bridge.
 From behind clumps of trees in the distance a railway train came past, all the
carriages were lit up, the windowpanes were certainly let down. One of us began to
sing a popular catch, but we all felt like singing. We sang much faster than the train
was going, we waved our arms because our voices were not enough, our voices rushed
together in an avalanche of sound that did us good. When one joins in song with
others it is like being drawn on by a fish hook.
 So we sang, the forest behind us, for the ears of the distant travelers. The
grownups were still awake in the village, the mothers were making down the beds for
the night.
 Our time was up. I kissed the one next to me, reached hands to the three
nearest, and began to run home, none called me back. At the first crossroads where
they could no longer see me I turned off and ran by the field paths into the forest
again. I was making for that city in the south of which it was said in our village:
 "There you'll find queer folk! Just think, they never sleep!"
 "And why not?"
$ 407
 "Because they never get tired."
 "And why not?"
 "Because they're fools."
 "Don't fools get tired?"
 "How could fools get tired!"
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Trees
 FOR WE are like tree trunks in the snow. In appearance they lie sleekly and a
little push should be enough to set them rolling. No, it can't be done, for they are
firmly wedded to the ground. But see, even that is only appearance.
$ 408
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Clothes
 OFTEN when I see clothes with manifold pleats, frills, and appendages which fit
so smoothly onto lovely bodies I think they won't keep that smoothness long, but will
get creases that can't be ironed out, dust lying so thick in the embroidery that it can't
be brushed away, and that no one would want to be so unhappy and so foolish as to
wear the same valuable gown every day from early morning till night.
 And yet I see girls who are lovely enough and display attractive muscles and
small bones and smooth skin and masses of delicate hair, and nonetheless appear day
in, day out, in this same natural fancy dress, always propping the same face on the
same palms and letting it be reflected from the looking glass.
 Only sometimes at night, on coming home late from a party, it seems in the
looking glass to be worn out, puffy, dusty, already seen by too many people, and hardly
wearable any longer.
$ 409
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Excursion into the Mountains
 "I DON'T KNOW," I cried without being heard, "I do not know. If nobody comes,
then nobody comes. I've done nobody any harm, nobody's done me any harm, but
nobody will help me. A pack of nobodies. Yet that isn't all true. Only, that nobody
helps me -- a pack of nobodies would be rather fine, on the other hand. I'd love to go
on an excursion -- why not? -- with a pack of nobodies. Into the mountains, of course,
where else? How these nobodies jostle each other, all these lifted arms linked together,
these numberless feet treading so close! Of course they are all in dress suits. We go so
gaily, the wind blows through us and the gaps in our company. Our throats swell and
are free in the mountains! It's a wonder that we don't burst into song."
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 410
Rejection
 WHEN I meet a pretty girl and beg her: "Be so good as to come with me," and
she walks past without a word, this is what she means to say:
 "You are no Duke with a famous name, no broad American with a Red Indian
figure, level, brooding eyes and a skin tempered by the air of the prairies and the rivers
that flow through them, you have never journeyed to the seven seas and voyaged on
them wherever they may be, I don't know where. So why, pray, should a pretty girl like
myself go with you?"
 "You forget that no automobile swings you through the street in long thrusts; I
see no gentlemen escorting you in a close half-circle, pressing on your skirts from
behind and murmuring blessings on your head; your breasts are well laced into your
bodice, but your thighs and hips make up for that restraint; you are wearing a taffeta
dress with a pleated skirt such as delighted all of us last autumn, and yet you smile --
inviting mortal danger -- from time to time."
 "Yes, we're both in the right, and to keep us from being irrevocably aware of it,
$ 411
hadn't we better just go our separate ways home?"
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Street Window
 WHOEVER leads a solitary life and yet now and then wants to attach himself
somewhere, whoever, according to changes in the time of day, the weather, the state of
his business, and the like, suddenly wishes to see any arm at all to which he might cling
-- he will not be able to manage for long without a window looking on to the street.
And if he is in the mood of not desiring anything and only goes to his window sill a
tired man, with eyes turning from his public to heaven and back again, not wanting to
look out and having thrown his head up a little, even then the horses below will draw
him down into their train of wagons and tumult, and so at last into the human
harmony.
$ 412
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Tradesman
 IT is POSSIBLE that some people are sorry for me, but I am not aware of it. My
small business fills me with worries that make my forehead and temples ache inside
yet without giving any prospect of relief, for my business is a small business.
 I have to spend hours beforehand making things ready, jogging the caretaker's
memory, warning him about mistakes he is likely to commit, and puzzling out in one
season of the year what the next season's fashions are to be, not such as are followed
by the people I know but those that will appeal to inaccessible peasants in the depths
of the country.
 My money is in the hands of strangers; the state of their affairs must be a
mystery to me; the ill luck that might overwhelm them I cannot foresee; how could I
possibly avert it! Perhaps they are running into extravagance and giving a banquet in
some inn garden, some of them may be attending the banquet as a brief respite before
their flight to America.
$ 413
 When at the close of a working day I turn the key on my business and suddenly
see before me hours in which I shall be able to do nothing to satisfy its never-ending
demands, then the excitement which I drove far away from me in the morning comes
back like a returning tide, but cannot be contained in me and sweeps me aimlessly
away with it.
 And yet I can make no use of this impulse, I can only go home, for my face and
hands are dirty and sweaty, my clothes are stained and dusty, my working cap is on my
head, and my shoes are scratched with the nails of crates. I go home as if lifted on a
wave, snapping the fingers of both hands, and caress the hair of any children I meet.
 But the way is short. Soon I reach my house, open the door of the lift, and step
in.
 I see that now, of a sudden, I am alone. Others who have to climb stairways tire
a little as they climb, have to wait with quick panting breath till someone opens the
door of the flat, which gives them an excuse for being irritable and impatient, have to
traverse the hallway where hats are hung up, and not until they go down a lobby past
several glass doors and come into their own room are they alone.
 But I am alone in the lift, immediately, and on my knees gaze into the narrow
looking glass. As the lift begins to rise, I say:
 "Quiet now, back with you, is it the shadow of the trees you want to make for,
or behind the window curtains, or into the garden arbor?"
 I say that behind my teeth, and the staircase flows down past the opaque glass
panes like running water.
 "Fly then; let your wings, which I have never seen, carry you into the village
hollow or as far as Paris, if that's where you want to go.
$ 414
 "But enjoy yourselves there looking out of the window, see the processions
converging out of three streets at once, not giving way to each other but marching
through each other and leaving the open space free again as their last ranks draw off.
Wave your handkerchiefs, be indignant, be moved, acclaim the beautiful lady who
drives past.
 "Cross over the stream on the wooden bridge, nod to the children bathing and
gape at the Hurrah! rising from the thousand sailors on the distant battleship.
 "Follow the trail of the inconspicuous little man, and when you have pushed
him into a doorway, rob him, and then watch him, each with your hands in your
pockets, as he sadly goes his way along the left-hand street.
 "The police dispersed on galloping horses rein in their mounts and thrust you
back. Let them, the empty streets will dishearten them, I know. What did I tell you,
they are riding away already in couples, slowly around the corners, at full speed across
the squares."
 Then I have to leave the lift, send it down again, and ring the bell, and the maid
opens the door while I say: Good evening.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 415
Absent-minded Window-gazing
 WHAT are we to do with these spring days that are now fast coming on? Early
this morning the sky was gray, but if you go to the window now you are surprised and
lean your cheek against the latch of the casement.
 The sun is already setting, but down below you see it lighting up the face of the
little girl who strolls along looking about her, and at the same time you see her
eclipsed by the shadow of the man behind overtaking her.
 And then the man has passed by and the little girl's face is quite bright.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Way Home
$ 416
 SEE what a persuasive force the air has after a thunderstorm! My merits become
evident and overpower me, though I don't put up any resistance, I grant you.
 I stride along and my tempo is the tempo of all my side of the street, of the
whole street, of the whole quarter. Mine is the responsibility, and rightly so, for all the
raps on doors or on the flat of a table, for all toasts drunk, for lovers in their beds, in
the scaffolding of new buildings, pressed to each other against the house walls in dark
alleys, or on the divans of a brothel.
 I weigh my past against my future, but find both of them admirable, cannot
give either the preference, and find nothing to grumble at save the injustice of
providence that has so clearly favored me.
 Only as I come into my room I feel a little meditative, without having met
anything on the stairs worth meditating about. It doesn't help me much to open the
window wide and hear music still playing in a garden.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 417
Passers-by
 WHEN you go walking by night up a street and a man, visible a long way off --
for the street mounts uphill and there is a full moon -- comes running toward you,
well, you don't catch hold of him, not even if he is a feeble and ragged creature, not
even if someone chases yelling at his heels, but you let him run on.
 For it is night, and you can't help it if the street goes uphill before you in the
moonlight, and besides, these two have maybe started that chase to amuse themselves,
or perhaps they are both chasing a third, perhaps the first is an innocent man and the
second wants to murder him and you would become an accessory, perhaps they don't
know anything about each other and are merely running separately home to bed,
perhaps they are night birds, perhaps the first man is armed.
 And anyhow, haven't you a right to be tired, haven't you been drinking a lot of
wine? You're thankful that the second man is now long out of sight.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 418
On the Tram
 I STAND on the end platform of the tram and am completely unsure of my
footing in this world, in this town, in my family. Not even casually could I indicate any
claims that I might rightly advance in any direction. I have not even any defense to
offer for standing on this platform, holding on to this strap, letting myself be carried
along by this tram, nor for the people who give way to the tram or walk quietly along
or stand gazing into shopwin-dows. Nobody asks me to put up a defense, indeed, but
that is irrelevant.
 The tram approaches a stopping place and a girl takes up her position near the
step, ready to alight. She is as distinct to me as if I had run my hands over her. She is
dressed in black, the pleats of her skirt hang almost still, her blouse is tight and has a
collar of white fine-meshed lace, her left hand is braced flat against the side of the
tram, the umbrella in her right hand rests on the second top step. Her face is brown,
her nose, slightly pinched at the sides, has a broad round tip. She has a lot of brown
hair and stray little tendrils on the right temple. Her small ear is close-set, but since I
am near her I can see the whole ridge of the whorl of her right ear and the shadow at
the root of it.
 At that point I asked myself: How is it that she is not amazed at herself, that she
keeps her lips closed and makes no such remark?
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 419
Reflections for Gentlemen-Jockeys
 WHEN you think it over, winning a race is nothing to sigh for.
 The fame of being hailed as the best rider in the country is too intoxicating a
pleasure when the applause strikes up not to bring a reaction the morning after.
 The envy of your opponents, cunning and fairly influential men, must trouble
you in the narrow enclosure you now traverse after the flat racecourse, which soon lay
empty before you save for some laggards of the previous round, small figures charging
the horizon.
 Many of your friends are rushing to gather their winnings and only cry
"Hurrah!" to you over their shoulders from distant pay boxes; your best friends laid no
bet on your horse, since they feared that they would have to be angry with you if you
lost, and now that your horse has come in first and they have won nothing, they turn
away as you pass and prefer to look along the stands.
 Your rivals behind you, firmly in the saddle, are trying to ignore the bad luck
that has befallen them and the injustice they have somehow suffered; they are putting
a brave new face on things, as if a different race were due to start, and this time a
$ 420
serious one after such child's play.
 For many ladies the victor cuts a ridiculous figure because he is swelling with
importance and yet cannot cope with the never-ending handshaking, saluting, bowing,
and waving, while the defeated keep their mouths shut and casually pat the necks of
their whinnying horses.
 And finally from the now overcast sky rain actually begins to fall.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Wish to Be a Red Indian
 IF ONE WERE only an Indian, instantly alert, and on a racing horse, leaning
against the wind, kept on quivering jerkily over the quivering ground, until one shed
one's spurs, for there needed no spurs, threw away the reins, for there needed no reins,
and hardly saw that the land before one was smoothly shorn heath when horse's neck
and head would be already gone.
$ 421
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Unhappiness
 WHEN it was becoming unbearable -- once toward evening in November -- and
I ran along the narrow strip of carpet in my room as on a racetrack, shrank from the
sight of the lit-up street, then turning to the interior of the room found a new goal in
the depths of the looking glass and screamed aloud, to hear only my own scream
which met no answer nor anything that could draw its force away, so that it rose up
without check and could not stop even when it ceased being audible, the door in the
wall opened toward me, how swiftly, because swiftness was needed and even the cart
horses down below on the paving stones were rising in the air like horses driven wild
in a battle, their throats bare to the enemy.
 Like a small ghost a child blew in from the pitch-dark corridor, where the lamp
was not yet lit, and stood a-tiptoe on a floor board that quivered imperceptibly. At
once dazzled by the twilight in my room she made to cover her face quickly with her
$ 422
hands, but contented herself unexpectedly with a glance at the window, where the
mounting vapor of the street lighting had at last settled under its cover of darkness
behind the crossbars. With her right elbow she supported herself against the wall in
the open doorway and let the draught from outside play along her ankles, her throat,
and her temples.
 I gave her a brief glance, then said "Good day," and took my jacket from the
hood of the stove, since I didn't want to stand there half-undressed. For a little while I
let my mouth hang open, so that my agitation could find a way out. I had a bad taste in
my mouth, my eyelashes were fluttering on my cheeks, in short this visit, though I had
expected it, was the one thing needful.
 The child was still standing by the wall on the same spot, she had pressed her
right hand against the plaster and was quite taken up with finding, her cheeks all pink,
that the whitewashed walls had a rough surface and chafed her finger tips. I said: "Are
you really looking for me? Isn't there some mistake? Nothing easier than to make a
mistake in this big building. I'm called So-and-so and I live on the third floor. Am I the
person you want to find?"
 "Hush, hush," said the child over her shoulder, "it's all right."
 "Then come farther into the room, I'd like to shut the door."
 "I've shut it this very minute. Don't bother. Just be easy in your mind."
 "It's no bother. But there's a lot of people living on this corridor, and I know
them all, of course; most of them are coming back from work now; if they hear
someone talking in a room, they simply think they have a right to open the door and
see what's happening. They're just like that. They've turned their backs on their daily
work and in their provisionally free evenings they're not going to be dictated to by
anyone. Besides, you know that as well as I do. Let me shut the door."
$ 423
 "Why, what's the matter with you? I don't mind if the whole house comes in.
Anyhow, as I told you, I've already shut the door, do you think you're the only person
who can shut doors? I've even turned the key in the lock."
 "That's all right then. I couldn't ask for more. You didn't need to turn the key,
either. And now that you are here, make yourself comfortable. You are my guest. You
can trust me entirely. Just make yourself at home and don't be afraid. I won't compel
you either to stay or to go away. Do I have to tell you that? Do you know me so little?"
 "No. You really didn't need to tell me that. What's more, you shouldn't have
told me. I'm just a child; why stand on so much ceremony with me?"
 "It's not so bad as that. A child, of course. But not so very small. You're quite
big. If you were a young lady, you wouldn't dare to lock yourself so simply in a room
with me."
 "We needn't worry about that. I just want to say: my knowing you so well isn't
much protection to me, it only relieves you of the effort of keeping up pretenses before
me. And yet you're paying me a compliment. Stop it, I beg you, do stop it. Anyhow, I
don't know you everywhere and all the time, least of all in this darkness. It would be
much better if you were to light up. No, perhaps not. At any rate I'll keep it in mind
that you have been threatening me."
 "What? Am I supposed to have threatened you? But, look here. I'm so pleased
that you've come at last. I say 'at last' because it's already rather late. I can't understand
why you've come so late. But it's possible that in the joy of seeing you I have been
speaking at random and you took up my words in the wrong sense. I'll admit ten times
over that I said something of the kind, I've made all kinds of threats, anything you like.
Only no quarreling, for Heaven's sake! But how could you think of such a thing? How
could you hurt me so? Why do you insist on spoiling this brief moment of your
presence here? A stranger would be more obliging than you are."
$ 424
 "That I can well believe; that's no great discovery. No stranger could come any
nearer to you than I am already by nature. You know that, too, so why all this pathos?
If you're only wanting to stage a comedy I'll go away immediately."
 "What? You have the impudence to tell me that? You make a little too bold.
After all, it's my room you're in. It's my wall you're rubbing your fingers on like mad.
My room, my wall! And besides, what you are saying is ridiculous as well as impudent.
You say your nature forces you to speak to me like that. Is that so? Your nature forces
you? That's kind of your nature. Your nature is mine, and if I feel friendly to you by
nature, then you mustn't be anything else."
 "Is that friendly?"
 "I'm speaking of earlier on."
 "Do you know how I'll be later on?"
 "I don't know anything."
 And I went to the bed table and lit the candle on it. At that time I had neither
gas nor electric light in my room. Then I sat for a while at the table till I got tired of it,
put on my greatcoat, took my hat from the sofa, and blew out the candle. As I went out
I tripped over the leg of a chair.
 On the stairs I met one of the tenants from my floor.
 "Going out again already, you rascal?" he asked, pausing with his legs firmly
straddled over two steps.
 "What can I do?" I said, "I've just had a ghost in my room."
 "You say that exactly as if you had just found a hair in your soup."
$ 425
 "You're making a joke of it. But let me tell you, a ghost is a ghost."
 "How true. But what if one doesn't believe in ghosts at all?"
 "Well, do you think I believe in ghosts? But how can my not believing help me?"
 "Quite simply. You don't need to feel afraid if a ghost actually turns up."
 "Oh, that's only a secondary fear. The real fear is a fear of what caused the
apparition. And that fear doesn't go away. I have it fairly powerfully inside me now."
Out of sheer nervousness I began to hunt through all my pockets.
 "But since you weren't afraid of the ghost itself, you could easily have asked it
how it came to be there."
 "Obviously you've never spoken to a ghost. One never gets straight information
from them. It's just a hither and thither. These ghosts seem to be more dubious about
their existence than we are, and no wonder, considering how frail they are."
 "But I've heard that one can fatten them up."
 "How well informed you are. It's quite true. But is anyone likely to do it?"
 "Why not? If it were a feminine ghost, for instance," said he, swinging onto the
top step.
 "Aha," said I, "but even then it's not worth while."
 I thought of something else. My neighbor was already so far up that in order to
see me he had to bend over the well of the staircase. "All the same," I called up, "if you
steal my ghost from me all is over between us, forever."
$ 426
 "Oh, I was only joking," he said and drew his head back.
 "That's all right," said I, and now I really could have gone quietly for a walk. But
because I felt so forlorn I preferred to go upstairs again and so went to bed.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Bachelor's Ill Luck
 IT SEEMS so dreadful to stay a bachelor, to become an old man struggling to
keep one's dignity while begging for an invitation whenever one wants to spend an
evening in company, to lie ill gazing for weeks into an empty room from the corner
where one's bed is, always having to say good night at the front door, never to run up a
stairway beside one's wife, to have only side doors in one's room leading into other
people's living rooms, having to carry one's supper home in one's hand, having to
admire other people's children and not even being allowed to go on saying: "I have
none myself," modeling oneself in appearance and behavior on one or two bachelors
remembered from one's youth.
$ 427
 That's how it will be, except that in reality, both today and later, one will stand
there with a palpable body and a real head, a real forehead, that is, for smiting on with
one's hand.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Unmasking a Confidence Trickster
 AT LAST, about ten o'clock at night, I came to the doorway of the fine house
where I was invited to spend the evening, after the man beside me, whom I was barely
acquainted with and who had once again thrust himself unasked upon me, had
marched me for two long hours around the streets.
 "Well!" I said, and clapped my hands to show that I really had to bid him
goodbye. I had already made several less explicit attempts to get rid of him. I was tired
out.
 "Are you going straight in?" he asked. I heard a sound in his mouth that was
$ 428
like the snapping of teeth.
 "Yes."
 I had been invited out, I told him when I met him. But it was to enter a house
where I longed to be that I had been invited, not to stand here at the street door
looking past the ears of the man before me. Nor to fall silent with him, as if we were
doomed to stay for a long time on this spot. And yet the houses around us at once took
a share in our silence, and the darkness over them, all the way up to the stars. And the
steps of invisible passers-by, which one could not take the trouble to elucidate, and the
wind persistently buffeting the other side of the street, and a gramophone singing
behind the closed windows of some room -- they all announced themselves in this
silence, as if it were their own possession for the time past and to come.
 And my companion subscribed to it in his own name and -- with a smile -- in
mine too, stretched his right arm up along the wall and leaned his cheek upon it,
shutting his eyes.
 But I did not wait to see the end of that smile, for shame suddenly caught hold
of me. It had needed that smile to let me know that the man was a confidence
trickster, nothing else. And yet I had been months in the town and thought I knew all
about confidence tricksters, how they came slinking out of side streets by night to
meet us with outstretched hands like tavernkeepers, how they haunted the
advertisement pillars we stood beside, sliding around them as if playing hide-and-seek
and spying on us with at least one eye, how they suddenly appeared on the curb of the
pavement at cross-streets when we were hesitating! I understood them so well, they
were the first acquaintances I had made in the town's small taverns, and to them I
owed my first inkling of a ruthless hardness which I was now so conscious of,
everywhere on earth, that I was even beginning to feel it in myself. How persistently
they blocked our way, even when we had long shaken ourselves free, even when, that
is, they had nothing more to hope for! How they refused to give up, to admit defeat,
$ 429
but kept shooting glances at us that even from a distance were still compelling! And
the means they employed were always the same: they planted themselves before us,
looking as large as possible, tried to hinder us from going where we purposed, offered
us instead a habitation in their own bosoms, and when at last all our balked feelings
rose in revolt they welcomed that like an embrace into which they threw themselves
face foremost.
 And it had taken me such a long time in this man's company to recognize the
same old game. I rubbed my finger tips together to wipe away the disgrace.
 My companion was still leaning there as before, still believing himself a
successful trickster, and his self-complacency glowed pink on his free cheek.
 "Caught in the act!" said I, tapping him lightly on the shoulder. Then I ran up
the steps, and the disinterested devotion on the servants' faces in the hall delighted me
like an unexpected treat. I looked at them all, one after another, while they took my
greatcoat off and wiped my shoes clean.
 With a deep breath of relief and straightening myself to my full height, I then
entered the drawing room.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 430
The Sudden Walk
 WHEN it looks as if you had made up your mind finally to stay at home for the
evening, when you have put on your house jacket and sat down after supper with a
light on the table to the piece of work or the game that usually precedes your going to
bed, when the weather outside is unpleasant so that staying indoors seems natural, and
when you have already been sitting quietly at the table for so long that your departure
must occasion surprise to everyone, when, besides, the stairs are in darkness and the
front door locked, and in spite of all that you have started up in a sudden fit of
restlessness, changed your jacket, abruptly dressed yourself for the street, explained
that you must go out and with a few curt words of leave-taking actually gone out,
banging the flat door more or less hastily according to the degree of displeasure you
think you have left behind you, and when you find yourself once more in the street
with limbs swinging extra freely in answer to the unexpected liberty you have
procured for them, when as a result of this decisive action you feel concentrated
within yourself all the potentialities of decisive action, when you recognize with more
than usual significance that your strength is greater than your need to accomplish
effortlessly the swiftest of changes and to cope with it, when in this frame of mind you
go striding down the long streets -- then for that evening you have completely got
away from your family, which fades into insubstantiality, while you yourself, a firm,
boldly drawn black figure, slapping yourself on the thigh, grow to your true stature.
 All this is still heightened if at such a late hour in the evening you look up a
friend to see how he is getting on.
$ 431
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Resolutions
 To LIFT YOURSELF out of a miserable mood, even if you have to do it by strength
of will, should be easy. I force myself out of my chair, stride around the table, exercise
my head and neck, make my eyes sparkle, tighten the muscles around them. Defy my
own feelings, welcome A. enthusiastically supposing he comes to see me, amiably
tolerate B. in my room, swallow all that is said at C.'s, whatever pain and trouble it may
cost me, in long draughts.
 Yet even if I manage that, one single slip, and a slip cannot be avoided, will stop
the whole process, easy and painful alike, and I will have to shrink back into my own
circle again.
 So perhaps the best resource is to meet everything passively, to make yourself
an inert mass, and, if you feel that you are being carried away, not to let yourself be
lured into taking a single unnecessary step, to stare at others with the eyes of an
animal, to feel no compunction, in short, with your own hand to throttle down
$ 432
whatever ghostly life remains in you, that is, to enlarge the final peace of the graveyard
and let nothing survive save that.
 A characteristic movement in such a condition is to run your little finger along
your eyebrows.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
A Dream
 JOSEF K. was dreaming.
 It was a beautiful day and K. felt like going for a walk. But hardly had he taken a
couple of steps when he was already at the cemetery. The paths there were very
winding, ingeniously made, and unpractical, but he glided along one of them as if on a
rushing stream with unshaken poise and balance. From a long way off his eye was
caught by a freshly heaped grave mound which he wanted to pause beside. This grave
mound exerted almost a fascination over him and he felt he could not reach it fast
$ 433
enough. But he often nearly lost sight of it, for his view was obscured by banners
which veered and flapped against each other with great force; one could not see the
standard-bearers, but there seemed to be a very joyous celebration going on.
 While he was still peering into the distance, he suddenly saw the grave mound
quite near his path, indeed he was almost leaving it behind him. He made a hasty
spring onto the grass. But since the path went rushing on under his shifting foot, he
tottered and fell on his knees just in front of the grave mound. Two men were standing
behind the grave and were holding a gravestone between them in the air; scarcely had
K. arrived when they thrust the stone into the earth and it stood as if cemented there.
Out of some bushes there came at once a third man, whom K. recognized immediately
as an artist. He was clad only in trousers and a badly buttoned shirt; on his head was a
velvet cap; in his hand he held an ordinary pencil with which he was already drawing
figures in the air as he approached.
 With this pencil he now addressed himself to the top end of the gravestone; the
stone was very tall, he did not have to bend down, though he had to bend forward,
since the grave mound, on which he shrank from setting foot, came between him and
the stone. So he stood on tiptoe and steadied himself with his left hand on the stone's
flat surface. With an astonishing turn of skill he managed to produce golden letters
from his ordinary pencil; he wrote: HERE LIES -- Every letter was clear and beautifully
made, deeply incised and of the purest gold. When he had inscribed these two words
he looked at K. over his shoulder; K., who was very eager to know how the inscription
would go, paid hardly any attention to the man but was intent only on the stone. And
in fact the man turned again to continue writing, but he could not go on, something
was hindering him, he let the pencil sink and once more turned toward K. This time K.
looked back at him and noted that he was deeply embarrassed and yet unable to
explain himself. All his earlier vivacity had vanished. That made K. feel embarrassed
too; they exchanged helpless glances; there was some dreadful misunderstanding
between them which neither could resolve. An untimely little bell now began to ring
$ 434
from the cemetery chapel, but the artist made a sign with uplifted hand and the bell
stopped. In a little while it began again; this time quite softly and without any
insistence, breaking off again at once; as if it were only testing its own tone. K. felt
miserable because of the artist's predicament, he began to cry and sobbed for a long
time into his cupped hands. The artist waited until K. had calmed down and then
decided, since there was no help for it, just to go on with the inscription. The first
small stroke that he made was a relief to K., but the artist obviously achieved it only
with the greatest reluctance; the work, too, was no longer beautifully finished, above
all there seemed to be a lack of gold leaf, pale and uncertain the stroke straggled down,
only it turned into a very big letter. It was a J, it was almost finished, and at that
moment the artist stamped angrily on the grave mound with one foot so that the soil
all around flew up in the air. At long last K. understood him; it was too late to start
apologizing now; with all his fingers he dug into the earth which offered almost no
resistance; everything seemed prepared beforehand; a thin crust of earth had been
constructed only for the look of the thing; immediately beneath it a great hole opened
out, with steep sides, into which K. sank, wafted onto his back by a gentle current. And
while he was already being received into impenetrable depths, his head still straining
upwards on his neck, his own name raced across the stone above him in great
flourishes.
 Enchanted by the sight, he woke up.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 435
Up in the Gallery
 IF SOME FRAIL, consumptive equestrienne in the circus were to be urged around
and around on an undulating horse for months on end without respite by a ruthless,
whip-flourishing ringmaster, before an insatiable public, whizzing along on her horse,
throwing kisses, swaying from the waist, and if this performance were likely to
continue in the infinite perspective of a drab future to the unceasing roar of the
orchestra and hum of the ventilators, accompanied by ebbing and renewed swelling
bursts of applause which are really steam hammers -- then, perhaps, a young visitor to
the gallery might race down the long stairs through all the circles, rush into the ring,
and yell: Stop! against the fanfares of the orchestra still playing the appropriate music.
 But since that is not so; a lovely lady, pink and white, floats in between the
curtains, which proud lackeys open before her; the ringmaster, deferentially catching
her eye, comes toward her breathing animal devotion; tenderly lifts her up on the
dapple-gray, as if she were his own most precious granddaughter about to start on a
dangerous journey; cannot make up his mind to give the signal with his whip, finally
masters himself enough to crack the whip loudly; runs along beside the horse, openmouthed; follows with a sharp eye the leaps taken by its rider; finds her artistic skill
almost beyond belief; calls to her with English shouts of warning; angrily exhorts the
grooms who hold the hoops to be most closely attentive; before the great somersault
lifts up his arms and implores the orchestra to be silent; finally lifts the little one down
from her trembling horse, kisses her on both cheeks, and finds that all the ovation she
gets from the audience is barely sufficient; while she herself, supported by him, right
up on the tips of her toes, in a cloud of dust, with outstretched arms and small head
$ 436
thrown back, invites the whole circus to share her triumph -- since that is so, the
visitor to the gallery lays his face on the rail before him and, sinking into the closing
march as into a heavy dream, weeps without knowing it.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
A Fratricide
 THE EVIDENCE shows that this is how the murder was committed:
 Schmar, the murderer, took up his post about nine o'clock one night in clear
moonlight by the corner where Wese, his victim, had to turn from the street where his
office was into the street he lived in.
 The night air was shivering cold. Yet Schmar was wearing only a thin blue suit;
the jacket was unbuttoned, too. He felt no cold; besides, he was moving about all the
time. His weapon, half a bayonet and half a kitchen knife, he kept firmly in his grasp,
quite naked. He looked at the knife against the light of the moon; the blade glittered;
$ 437
not enough for Schmar; he struck it against the bricks of the pavement till the sparks
flew; regretted that, perhaps; and to repair the damage drew it like a violin bow across
his boot sole while he bent forward, standing on one leg, and listened both to the
whetting of the knife on his boot and for any sound out of the fateful side street.
 Why did Pallas, the private citizen who was watching it all from his window
nearby in the second storey, permit it to happen? Unriddle the mysteries of human
nature! With his collar turned up, his dressing gown girt around his portly body, he
stood looking down, shaking his head.
 And five houses further along, on the opposite side of the street, Mrs. Wese,
with a fox-fur coat over her nightgown, peered out to look for her husband who was
lingering unusually late tonight.
 At last there rang out the sound of the doorbell before Wese's office, too loud
for a doorbell, right over the town and up to heaven, and Wese, the industrious
nightworker, issued from the building, still invisible in that street, only heralded by the
sound of the bell; at once the pavement registered his quiet footsteps.
 Pallas bent far forward; he dared not miss anything. Mrs. Wese, reassured by
the bell, shut her window with a clatter. But Schmar knelt down; since he had no other
parts of his body bare, he pressed only his face and his hands against the pavement;
where everything else was freezing, Schmar was glowing hot.
 At the very corner dividing the two streets Wese paused, only his walking stick
came around into the other street to support him. A sudden whim. The night sky
invited him, with its dark blue and its gold. Unknowing, he gazed up at it, unknowing
he lifted his hat and stroked his hair; nothing up there drew together in a pattern to
interpret the immediate future for him; everything stayed in its senseless, inscrutable
place. In itself it was a highly reasonable action that Wese should walk on, but he
walked onto Schmar's knife.
$ 438
 "Wese!" shrieked Schmar, standing on tiptoe, his arm outstretched, the knife
sharply lowered, "Wese! You will never see Julia again!" And right into the throat and
left into the throat and a third time deep into the belly stabbed Schmar's knife. Water
rats, slit open, give out such a sound as came from Wese.
 "Done," said Schmar, and pitched the knife, now superfluous blood-stained
ballast, against the nearest house front. "The bliss of murder! The relief, the soaring
ecstasy from the shedding of another's blood! Wese, old nightbird, friend, alehouse
crony, you are oozing away into the dark earth below the street. Why aren't you simply
a bladder of blood so that I could stamp on you and make you vanish into nothingness.
Not all we want comes true, not all the dreams that blossomed have borne fruit, your
solid remains lie here, already indifferent to every kick. What's the good of the dumb
question you are asking?"
 Pallas, choking on the poison in his body, stood at the double-leafed door of his
house as it flew open. "Schmar! Schmar! I saw it all, I missed nothing." Pallas and
Schmar scrutinized each other. The result of the scrutiny satisfied Pallas, Schmar
came to no conclusion.
 Mrs. Wese, with a crowd of people on either side, came rushing up, her face
grown quite old with the shock. Her fur coat swung open, she collapsed on top of
Wese, the nightgowned body belonged to Wese, the fur coat spreading over the couple
like the smooth turf of a grave belonged to the crowd.
 Schmar, fighting down with difficulty the last of his nausea, pressed his mouth
against the shoulder of the policeman who, stepping lightly, led him away.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 439
The Next Village
 MY grandfather used to say: "Life is astoundingly short. To me, looking back
over it, life seems so foreshortened that I scarcely understand, for instance, how a
young man can decide to ride over to the next village without being afraid that -- not
to mention accidents -- even the span of a normal happy life may fall far short of the
time needed for such a journey."
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 440
A Visit to a Mine
 TODAY the chief engineers have been down to our part of the mine. The
management has issued some instructions or other about boring new galleries, and so
the engineers arrived to make the initial survey. How young these men are and yet
how different from each other! They have all grown up in freedom and show clearly
defined characters without self-consciousness even in their youth.
 One, a lively man with black hair, has eyes that take in everything.
 A second with a notebook makes jottings as he goes, looks around him,
compares, notes down.
 A third, his hands in his coat pockets, so that everything about him is taut,
walks very upright; maintains his dignity; only the fact that he keeps biting his lips
betrays his impatient, irrepressible youth.
 A fourth showers explanations on the third, who does not ask for them; smaller
than the other, trotting beside him like a temper, his index finger always in the air, he
seems to be making a running commentary on everything he sees.
 A fifth, perhaps the senior in rank, suffers no one to accompany him; now he is
in front, now behind; the group accommodates its pace to him; he is pallid and frail;
responsibility has made his eyes hollow; he often presses his hand to his forehead in
thought.
 The sixth and seventh walk leaning forward a little, their heads close together,
$ 441
arm in arm, in confidential talk; if this were not unmistakably our coal mine and our
working station in the deepest gallery, one could easily believe that these bony,
cleanshaven, knobbly-nosed gentlemen were young clerics. One of them laughs mostly
to himself with a catlike purring; the other, smiling too, leads the conversation and
beats some kind of time to it with his free hand. How sure these two must be of their
position; yes, what services must they have already rendered to our mine in spite of
their youth, to be able here, on such an important survey, under the eyes of their chief,
to devote themselves so unwaveringly to their own affairs, or at least to affairs that
have nothing to do with the immediate task? Or might it be possible that, in spite of
their laughter and apparent inattention, they are very well aware of whatever is
needful? One scarcely ventures to pass a decisive judgment on gentlemen like these.
 On the other hand, there is no doubt at all that the eighth man, for instance, is
incomparably more intent on his work than these two, indeed more than all the other
gentlemen. He has to touch everything and tap it with a little hammer which he keeps
taking out of his pocket and putting back again. He often goes down on his knees in
the dirt, despite his elegant attire, and taps the ground, then again taps the walls as he
walks along or the roof over his head. Once he stretched himself out at full length and
lay still; we were beginning to think something had gone wrong with him; then with a
sudden recoil of his lithe body he sprang to his feet. He had only been making another
investigation. We fancy that we know our mine and its rock formations, but what this
engineer can be sounding all the time in such a manner lies beyond our
comprehension.
 A ninth man pushes a kind of perambulator in front of him with the surveying
instruments. Extremely expensive apparatus, deeply embedded in the softest cotton
wool. The office porter ought really to be pushing this vehicle, but he is not trusted
with it; an engineer has to do it, and one can see that he does it with good will. He is
probably the youngest, perhaps he doesn't even understand all the apparatus yet, but
he keeps his eye on the instruments all the time, which brings him often into danger of
$ 442
running his vehicle into the wall.
 But there is another engineer walking alongside who prevents that from
happening. Obviously he understands the apparatus thoroughly and seems to be really
the man in charge of it. From time to time, without stopping the vehicle, he takes up a
part of some instrument, peers through it, screws it open or shut, shakes it and taps it,
holds it to his ear and listens; and finally, while the man pushing the instruments
usually stands still, he lays the small thing, which one can scarcely discern at a
distance, back into its packing with great care. This engineer is a little domineering,
but only in the service of his instruments. Ten paces ahead of the perambulator we
have to give way to it at a wordless sign of his finger, even where there is no room for
us to make way.
 Behind these two gentlemen stalks the office porter, with nothing to do. The
gentlemen, as is to be expected from men of their great knowledge, have long dropped
any arrogance they ever had, but the porter seems to have picked it all up and kept it.
With one hand tucked behind him, the other in front fingering the gilt buttons or fine
facecloth of his uniform, he keeps bowing to right and left as if we had saluted him and
he were answering, or rather as if he assumed that we had saluted him, he being too
high and mighty to see any salutes. Of course we do not salute him, yet one could
almost believe, to look at him, that it is a great distinction to be a porter at the head
office of the mine. Behind his back, to be sure, we burst out laughing, but as not even a
thunderbolt could make him look around, he remains an unsolved riddle for us to
respect.
 Today we shall not do much work; the interruption has been too interesting;
such a visit draws away with it all thoughts of work. It is too tempting to stand gazing
after the gentlemen as they vanish into the darkness of the trial gallery. Besides, our
shift will soon come to an end; we shall not be here to see them coming back.
$ 443
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Jackals and Arabs
 WE were camping in the oasis. My companions were asleep. The tall, white
figure of an Arab passed by; he had been seeing to the camels and was on his way to
his own sleeping place.
 I threw myself on my back in the grass; I tried to fall asleep; I could not; a jackal
howled in the distance; I sat up again. And what had been so far away was all at once
quite near. Jackals were swarming around me, eyes gleaming dull gold and vanishing
again, lithe bodies moving nimbly and rhythmically, as if at the crack of a whip.
 One jackal came from behind me, nudging right under my arm, pressing
against me, as if he needed my warmth, and then stood before me and spoke to me
almost eye to eye.
 "I am the oldest jackal far and wide. I am delighted to have met you here at last.
I had almost given up hope, since we have been waiting endless years for you; my
mother waited for you, and her mother, and all our foremothers right back to the first
$ 444
mother of all the jackals. It is true, believe me!"
 "That is surprising," said I, forgetting to kindle the pile of firewood which lay
ready to smoke away jackals, "that is very surprising for me to hear. It is by pure
chance that I have come here from the far North, and I am making only a short tour of
your country. What do you jackals want, then?"
 As if emboldened by this perhaps too-friendly inquiry the ring of jackals closed
in on me; all were panting and openmouthed.
 "We know," began the eldest, "that you have come from the North; that is just
what we base our hopes on. You Northerners have the kind of intelligence that is not
to be found among Arabs. Not a spark of intelligence, let me tell you, can be struck
from their cold arrogance. They kill animals for food, and carrion they despise."
 "Not so loud," said I, "there are Arabs sleeping nearby."
 "You are indeed a stranger here," said the jackal, "or you would know that never
in the history of the world has any jackal been afraid of an Arab. Why should we fear
them? Is it not misfortune enough for us to be exiled among such creatures?"
 "Maybe, maybe," said I, "matters so far outside my province I am not
competent to judge; it seems to me a very old quarrel; I suppose it's in the blood, and
perhaps will only end with it."
 "You are very clever," said the old jackal; and they all began to pant more
quickly; the air pumped out of their lungs although they were statiding still; a rank
smell which at times I had to set my teeth to endure streamed from their open jaws,
"you are very clever; what you have just said agrees with our old tradition. So we shall
draw blood from them and the quarrel will be over."
$ 445
 "Oh!" said I, more vehemently than I intended, "they'll defend themselves;
they'll shoot you down in dozens with their muskets."
 "You misunderstand us," said he, "a human failing which persists apparently
even in the far North. We're not proposing to kill them. All the water in the Nile
couldn't cleanse us of that. Why, the mere sight of their living flesh makes us turn tail
and flee into cleaner air, into the desert, which for that very reason is our home."
 And all the jackals around, including many newcomers from farther away,
dropped their muzzles between their forelegs and wiped them with their paws; it was
as if they were trying to conceal a disgust so overpowering that I felt like leaping over
their heads to get away.
 "Then what are you proposing to do?" I asked, trying to rise to my feet; but I
could not get up; two young beasts behind me had locked their teeth through my coat
and shirt; I had to go on sitting. "These are your trainbearers," explained the old jackal,
quite seriously, "a mark of honor." "They must let go!" I cried, turning now to the old
jackal, now to the youngsters. "They will, of course," said the old one, "if that is your
wish. But it will take a little time, for they have got their teeth well in, as is our custom,
and must first loosen their jaws bit by bit. Meanwhile, give ear to our petition." "Your
conduct hasn't exactly inclined me to grant it," said I. "Don't hold it against us that we
are clumsy," said he, and now for the first time had recourse to the natural
plaintiveness of his voice, "we are poor creatures, we have nothing but our teeth;
whatever we want to do, good or bad, we can tackle it only with our teeth." "Well, what
do you want?" I asked, not much mollified.
 "Sir," he cried, and all the jackals howled together; very remotely it seemed to
resemble a melody. "Sir, we want you to end this quarrel that divides the world. You
are exactly the man whom our ancestors foretold as born to do it. We want to be
troubled no more by Arabs; room to breathe; a skyline cleansed of them; no more
bleating of sheep knifed by an Arab; every beast to die a natural death; no interference
$ 446
till we have drained the carcass empty and picked its bones clean. Cleanliness, nothing
but cleanliness is what we want" -- and now they were all lamenting and sobbing --
"how can you bear to live in such a world, O noble heart and kindly bowels? Filth is
their white; filth is their black; their beards are a horror; the very sight of their eye
sockets makes one want to spit; and when they lift an arm, the murk of hell yawns in
the armpit. And so, sir, and so, dear sir, by means of your all-powerful hands slit their
throats through with these scissors!" And in answer to a jerk of his head a jackal came
trotting up with a small pair of sewing scissors, covered with ancient rust, dangling
from an eyetooth.
 "Well, here's the scissors at last, and high time to stop!" cried the Arab leader of
our caravan who had crept upwind toward us and now cracked his great whip.
 The jackals fled in haste, but at some little distance rallied in a close huddle, all
the brutes so tightly packed and rigid that they looked as if penned in a small fold girt
by flickering will-o'-the-wisps.
 "So you've been treated to this entertainment too, sir," said the Arab, laughing
as gaily as the reserve of his race permitted. "You know, then, what the brutes are
after?" I asked. "Of course," said he, "it's common knowledge; so long as Arabs exist,
that pair of scissors goes wandering through the desert and will wander with us to the
end of our days. Every European is offered it for the great work; every European is just
the man that Fate has chosen for them. They have the most lunatic hopes, these
beasts; they're just fools, utter fools. That's why we like them; they are our dogs; finer
dogs than any of yours. Watch this, now, a camel died last night and I have had it
brought here."
 Four men came up with the heavy carcass and threw it down before us. It had
hardly touched the ground before the jackals lifted up their voices. As if irresistibly
drawn by cords each of them began to waver forward, crawling on his belly. They had
forgotten the Arabs, forgotten their hatred, the all-obliterating immediate presence of
$ 447
the stinking carrion bewitched them. One was already at the camel's throat, sinking his
teeth straight into an artery. Like a vehement small pump endeavoring with as much
determination as hopefulness to extinguish some raging fire, every muscle in his body
twitched and labored at the task. In a trice they were all on top of the carcass, laboring
in common, piled mountain-high.
 And now the caravan leader lashed his cutting whip crisscross over their backs.
They lifted their heads; half swooning in ecstasy; saw the Arabs standing before them;
felt the sting of the whip on their muzzles; leaped and ran backwards a stretch. But the
camel's blood was already lying in pools, reeking to heaven, the carcass was torn wide
open in many places. They could not resist it; they were back again; once more the
leader lifted his whip; I stayed his arm.
 "You are right, sir," said he, "we'll leave them to their business; besides, it's time
to break camp. Well, you've seen them. Marvelous creatures, aren't they? And how
they hate us!"
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 448
The Bridge
 I WAS stiff and cold, I was a bridge, I lay over a ravine. My toes on one side, my
fingers clutching the other, I had clamped myself fast into the crumbling clay. The tails
of my coat fluttered at my sides. Far below brawled the icy trout stream. No tourist
strayed to this impassable height, the bridge was not yet traced on any map. So I lay
and waited; I could only wait. Without falling, no bridge, once spanned, can cease to
be a bridge.
 It was toward evening one day -- was it the first, was it the thousandth? I
cannot tell -- my thoughts were always in confusion and perpetually moving in a
circle. It was toward evening in summer, the roar of the stream had grown deeper,
when I heard the sound of a human step! To me, to me. Straighten yourself, bridge,
make ready, railless beams, to hold up the passenger entrusted to you. If his steps are
uncertain, steady them unobtrusively, but if he stumbles show what you are made of
and like a mountain god hurl him across to land.
 He came, he tapped me with the iron point of his stick, then he lifted my
coattails with it and put them in order upon me. He plunged the point of his stick into
my bushy hair and let it lie there for a long time, forgetting me no doubt while he
wildly gazed around him. But then -- I was just following him in thought over
mountain and valley -- he jumped with both feet on the middle of my body. I
shuddered with wild pain, not knowing what was happening. Who was it? A child? A
dream? A wayfarer? A suicide? A tempter? A destroyer? And I turned around so as to
see him. A bridge to turn around! I had not yet turned quite around when I already
began to fall, I fell and in a moment I was torn and transpierced by the sharp rocks
which had always gazed up at me so peacefully from the rushing water.
$ 449
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Bucket Rider
 COAL all spent; the bucket empty; the shovel useless; the stove breathing out
cold; the room freezing; the trees outside the window rigid, covered with rime; the sky
a silver shield against anyone who looks for help from it. I must have coal; I cannot
freeze to death; behind me is the pitiless stove, before me the pitiless sky, so I must
ride out between them and on my journey seek aid from the coaldealer. But he has
already grown deaf to ordinary appeals; I must prove irrefutably to him that I have not
a single grain of coal left, and that he means to me the very sun in the firmament. I
must approach like a beggar, who, with the death rattle already in his throat, insists on
dying on the doorstep, and to whom the cook accordingly decides to give the dregs of
the coffeepot; just so must the coaldealer, filled with rage, but acknowledging the
command "Thou shalt not kill," fling a shovelful of coal into my bucket.
 My mode of arrival must decide the matter; so I ride off on the bucket. Seated
on the bucket, my hands on the handle, the simplest kind of bridle, I propel myself
with difficulty down the stairs; but once downstairs my bucket ascends, superbly,
$ 450
superbly; camels humbly squatting on the ground do not rise with more dignity,
shaking themselves under the sticks of their drivers. Through the hard-frozen streets
we go at a regular canter; often I am upraised as high as the first storey of a house;
never do I sink as low as the house doors. And at last I float at an extraordinary height
above the vaulted cellar of the dealer, whom I see far below crouching over his table,
where he is writing; he has opened the door to let out the excessive heat.
 "Coaldealer!" I cry in a voice burned hollow by the frost and muffled in the
cloud made by my breath, "please, coaldealer, give me a little coal. My bucket is so
light that I can ride on it. Be kind. When I can I'll pay you."
 The dealer puts his hand to his ear. "Do I hear right?" he throws the question
over his shoulder to his wife. "Do I hear right? A customer."
 "I hear nothing," says his wife, breathing in and out peacefully while she knits
on, her back pleasantly warmed by the heat.
 "Oh yes, you must hear," I cry. "It's me; an old customer; faithful and true; only
without means at the moment."
 "Wife," says the dealer, "it's someone, it must be; my ears can't have deceived
me so much as that; it must be an old, a very old customer, that can move me so
deeply."
 "What ails you, man?" says his wife, ceasing from her work for a moment and
pressing her knitting to her bosom. "It's nobody, the street is empty, all our customers
are provided for; we could close down the shop for several days and take a rest."
 "But I'm sitting up here on the bucket," I cry, and numb, frozen tears dim my
eyes, "please look up here, just once; you'll see me directly; I beg you, just a shovelful;
and if you give me more it'll make me so happy that I won't know what to do. All the
$ 451
other customers are provided for. Oh, if I could only hear the coal clattering into the
bucket!"
 "I'm coming," says the coaldealer, and on his short legs he makes to climb the
steps of the cellar, but his wife is already beside him, holds him back by the arm and
says: "You stay here; seeing you persist in your fancies I'll go myself. Think of the bad
fit of coughing you had during the night. But for a piece of business, even if it's one
you've only fancied in your head, you're prepared to forget your wife and child and
sacrifice your lungs. I'll go."
 "Then be sure to tell him all the kinds of coal we have in stock! I'll shout out the
prices after you."
 "Right," says his wife, climbing up to the street. Naturally she sees me at once.
"Frau Coaldealer," I cry, "my humblest greetings; just one shovelful of coal; here in my
bucket; I'll carry it home myself. One shovelful of the worst you have. I'll pay you in
full for it, of course, but not just now, not just now." What a knell-like sound the words
"not just now" have, and how bewilderingly they mingle with the evening chimes that
fall from the church steeple nearby!
 "Well, what does he want?" shouts the dealer. "Nothing," his wife shouts back,
"there's nothing here; I see nothing, I hear nothing; only six striking, and now we must
shut up the shop. The cold is terrible; tomorrow we'll likely have lots to do again."
 She sees nothing and hears nothing; but all the same she loosens her apron
strings and waves her apron to waft me away. She succeeds, unluckily. My bucket has
all the virtues of a good steed except powers of resistance, which it has not; it is too
light; a woman's apron can make it fly through the air.
 "You bad woman!" I shout back, while she, turning into the shop, halfcontemptuous, half-reassured, flourishes her fist in the air. "You bad woman! I begged
$ 452
you for a shovelful of the worst coal and you would not give it me." And with that I
ascend into the regions of the ice mountains and am lost forever.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The New Advocate
 WE HAVE a new advocate, Dr. Bucephalus. There is little in his appearance to
remind you that he was once Alexander of Macedon's battle charger. Of course, if you
know his story, you are aware of something. But even a simple usher whom I saw the
other day on the front steps of the Law Courts, a man with the professional appraisal
of the regular small bettor at a racecourse, was running an admiring eye over the
advocate as he mounted the marble steps with a high action that made them ring
beneath his feet.
 In general the Bar approves the admission of Bucephalus. With astonishing
insight people tell themselves that, modern society being what it is, Bucephalus is in a
difficult position, and therefore, considering also his importance in the history of the
$ 453
world, he deserves at least a friendly reception. Nowadays -- it cannot be denied --
there is no Alexander the Great. There are plenty of men who know how to murder
people; the skill needed to reach over a banqueting table and pink a friend with a lance
is not lacking; and for many Macedonia is too confining, so that they curse Philip, the
father -- but no one, no one at all, can blaze a trail to India. Even in his day the gates of
India were beyond reach, yet the King's sword pointed the way to them. Today the
gates have receded to remoter and loftier places; no one points the way; many carry
swords, but only to brandish them, and the eye that tries to follow them is confused.
 So perhaps it is really best to do as Bucephalus has done and absorb oneself in
law books. In the quiet lamplight, his flanks unhampered by the thighs of a rider, free
and far from the clamor of battle, he reads and turns the pages of our ancient tomes.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
An Old Manuscript
 It looks as if much had been neglected in our country's system of defense. We
$ 454
have not concerned ourselves with it until now and have gone about our daily work;
but things that have been happening recently begin to trouble us.
 I have a cobbler's workshop in the square that lies before the Emperor's palace.
Scarcely have I taken my shutters down, at the first glimmer of dawn, when I see
armed soldiers already posted in the mouth of every street opening on the square. But
these soldiers are not ours, they are obviously nomads from the North. In some way
that is incomprehensible to me they have pushed right into the capital, although it is a
long way from the frontier. At any rate, here they are; it seems that every morning
there are more of them.
 As is their nature, they camp under the open sky, for they abominate dwelling
houses. They busy themselves sharpening swords, whittling arrows, and practicing
horsemanship. This peaceful square, which was always kept so scrupulously clean,
they have made literally into a stable. We do try every now and then to run out of our
shops and clear away at least the worst of the filth, but this happens less and less often,
for the labor is in vain and brings us besides into danger of falling under the hoofs of
the wild horses or of being crippled with lashes from the whips.
 Speech with the nomads is impossible. They do not know our language, indeed
they hardly have a language of their own. They communicate with each other much as
jackdaws do. A screeching as of jackdaws is always in our ears. Our way of living and
our institutions they neither understand nor care to understand. And so they are
unwilling to make sense even out of our sign language. You can gesture at them till
you dislocate your jaws and your wrists and still they will not have understood you and
will never understand. They often make grimaces; then the whites of their eyes turn up
and foam gathers on their lips, but they do not mean anything by that, not even a
threat; they do it because it is their nature to do it. Whatever they need, they take. You
cannot call it taking by force. They grab at something and you simply stand aside and
leave them to it.
$ 455
 From my stock, too, they have taken many good articles. But I cannot complain
when I see how the butcher, for instance, suffers across the street. As soon as he brings
in any meat the nomads snatch it all from him and gobble it up. Even their horses
devour flesh; often enough a horseman and his horse are lying side by side, both of
them gnawing at the same joint, one at either end. The butcher is nervous and does
not dare to stop his deliveries of meat. We understand that, however, and subscribe
money to keep him going. If the nomads got no meat, who knows what they might
think of doing; who knows anyhow what they may think of, even though they get meat
every day.
 Not long ago the butcher thought he might at least spare himself the trouble of
slaughtering, and so one morning he brought along a live ox. But he will never dare to
do that again. I lay for a whole hour flat on the floor at the back of my workshop with
my head muffled in all the clothes and rugs and pillows I had simply to keep from
hearing the bellowing of that ox, which the nomads were leaping on from all sides,
tearing morsels out of its living flesh with their teeth. It had been quiet for a long time
before I risked coming out; they were lying overcome around the remains of the
carcass like drunkards around a wine cask.
 This was the occasion when I fancied I actually saw the Emperor himself at a
window of the palace; usually he never enters these outer rooms but spends all his
time in the innermost garden; yet on this occasion he was standing, or so at least it
seemed to me, at one of the windows, watching with bent head the goings-on before
his residence.
 "What is going to happen?" we all ask ourselves. "How long can we endure this
burden and torment? The Emperor's palace has drawn the nomads here but does not
know how to drive them away again. The gate stays shut; the guards, who used to be
always marching out and in with ceremony, keep close behind barred windows. It is
left to us artisans and tradesmen to save our country; but we are not equal to such a
$ 456
task; nor have we ever claimed to be capable of it. This is a misunderstanding of some
kind; and it will be the ruin of us."
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Knock at the Manor Gate
 IT WAS SUMMER, a hot day. With my sister I was passing the gate of a great
house on our way home. I cannot tell now whether she knocked on the gate out of
mischief or out of absence of mind, or merely threatened it with her fist and did not
knock at all. A hundred paces further on along the road, which here turned to the left,
began the village. We did not know it very well, but no sooner had we passed the first
house when people appeared and made friendly or warning signs to us; they were
themselves apparently terrified, bowed down with terror. They pointed toward the
manor house that we had passed and reminded us of the knock on the gate. The
proprietor of the manor would charge us with it, the interrogation would begin
immediately. I remained quite calm and also tried to calm my sister's fears. Probably
$ 457
she had not struck the door at all, and if she had, nowhere in the world would that be a
reason for prosecution. I tried to make this clear to the people around us; they listened
to me but refrained from passing any opinion. Later they told me that not only my
sister, but I too, as her brother, would be charged. I nodded and smiled. We all gazed
back at the manor, as one watches a distant smoke cloud and waits for the flames to
appear. And right enough we presently saw horsemen riding in through the wide-open
gate. Dust rose, concealing everything, only the tops of the tall spears glittered. And
hardly had the troop vanished into the manor courtyard before they seemed to have
turned their horses again, for they were already on their way to us. I urged my sister to
leave me, I myself would set everything right. She refused to leave me. I told her that
she should at least change, so as to appear in better clothes before these gentlemen. At
last she obeyed and set out on the long road to our home. Already the horsemen were
beside us, and even before dismounting they inquired after my sister. She wasn't here
at the moment, was the apprehensive reply, but she would come later. The answer was
received almost with indifference; the important thing seemed their having found me.
The chief members of the party appeared to be a young lively fellow, who was a judge,
and his silent assistant, who was called Assmann. I was asked to enter the farmhouse.
Shaking my head and hitching up my trousers, I slowly began to move, while the sharp
eyes of the party scrutinized me. I still half believed that a word would be enough to
free me, a city man, and with honor too, from this peasant folk. But when I had
stepped over the threshold of the parlor the judge, who had hastened in front and was
already awaiting me, said: "I'm really sorry for this man." And it was beyond all
possibility of doubt that by this he did not mean my present state, but something that
was to happen to me. The room looked more like a prison cell than the parlor of a
farmhouse. Great stone flags on the floor, dark, quite bare walls, into one of which an
iron ring was fixed, in the middle something that looked half a pallet, half an operating
table.
 Could I still endure any other air than prison air? That is the great question, or
rather it would be if I still had any prospect of release.
$ 458
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Eleven Sons
 I HAVE eleven sons.
 The first is outwardly very plain, but serious and clever; yet, although I love
him as I love all my children, I do not rate him very highly. His mental processes seem
to me to be too simple. He looks neither to right nor to left, nor into the far distance;
he runs around all the time, or rather revolves, within his own little circle of thoughts.
 The second is handsome, slim, well made; one draws one's breath with delight
to watch him with a fencing foil. He is clever too, but has experience of the world as
well; he has seen much, and therefore even our native country seems to yield more
secrets to him than to the stay-at-home. Yet I am sure that this advantage is not only
and not even essentially due to his travels, it is rather an attribute of his own inimitable
nature, which is acknowledged for instance by everyone who has ever tried to copy
him in, let us say, the fancy high dive he does into the water, somersaulting several
$ 459
times over, yet with almost violent self-control. To the very end of the springboard the
emulator keeps up his courage and his desire to follow; but at that point, instead of
leaping into the air, he sits down suddenly and lifts his arms in excuse. -- And despite
all this (I ought really to feel blessed with such a son) my attachment to him is not
untroubled. His left eye is a little smaller than his right and blinks a good deal; only a
small fault, certainly, and one which even lends more audacity to his face than it would
otherwise have, nor, considering his unapproachable self-sufficiency, would anyone
think of noticing and finding fault with this smaller eye and the way it blinks. Yet I, his
father, do so. Of course, it is not the physical blemish that worries me, but a small
irregularity of the spirit that somehow corresponds to it, a kind of stray poison in the
blood, a kind of inability to develop to the full the potentialities of his nature which I
alone can see. On the other hand, this is just what makes him again my own true son,
for this fault of his is a fault of our whole family and in him it is only too apparent.
 My third son is handsome too, but not in a way that I appreciate. He has the
good looks of a singer: the curving lips; the dreaming eye; the kind of head that asks
for drapery behind it to make it effective; the too-deeply arched chest; hands that are
quick to fly up and much too quick to fall limp; legs that move delicately because they
cannot support a weight. And besides: the tone of his voice is not round and full; it
takes you in for a moment; the connoisseur pricks up his ears; but almost at once its
breath gives out. -- Although, in general, everything tempts me to bring this son of
mine into the limelight, I prefer to keep him in the background; he himself is not
insistent, yet not because he is aware of his shortcomings but out of innocence.
Moreover, he does not feel at home in our age; as if he admitted belonging to our
family, yet knew that he belonged also to another which he has lost forever, he is often
melancholy and nothing can.cheer him.
 My fourth son is perhaps the most companionable of all. A true child of his age,
he is understood by everyone, he stands on what is common ground to all men, and
everyone feels inclined to give him a nod. Perhaps this universal appreciation is what
$ 460
makes his nature rather facile, his movements rather free, his judgments rather
unconcerned. Many of his remarks are worth quoting over and over again, but by no
means all of them, for by and large his extreme facility becomes irritating. He is like a
man who makes a wonderful take-off from the ground, cleaves the air like a swallow,
and after all comes down helplessly in a desert waste, a nothing. Such reflections gall
me when I look at him.
 My fifth son is kind and good; promised less than he performed; used to be so
insignificant that one literally felt alone in his presence; but has achieved a certain
reputation. If I were asked how this came about, I could hardly tell you. Perhaps
innocence makes its way easiest through the elemental chaos of this world, and
innocent he certainly is. Perhaps too innocent. Friendly to everyone. Perhaps too
friendly. I confess: I don't feel comfortable when I hear him praised. It seems to make
praise rather too cheap to bestow it on anyone so obviously praiseworthy as this son of
mine.
 My sixth son seems, at first glance anyhow, the most thoughtful of all. He is
given to hanging his head, and yet he is a great talker. So he is not easy to get at. If he is
on the down grade, he falls into impenetrable melancholy; if he is in the ascendant, he
maintains his advantage by sheer talk. Yet I grant him a certain self-forgetful
passionate absorption; in the full light of day he often fights his way through a tangle
of thoughts as if in a dream. Without being ill -- his health on the contrary is very good
-- he sometimes staggers, especially in the twilight, but he needs no help, he never
falls. Perhaps his physical growth is the cause of this phenomenon, he is much too tall
for his age. That makes him look ugly in general, although he has remarkable beauty in
detail, in hands and feet, for instance. His forehead, too, is ugly; both its skin and its
bone formation are somehow arrested in their development.
 The seventh son belongs to me perhaps more than all the others. The world
would not know how to appreciate him; it does not understand his peculiar brand of
$ 461
wit. I do not overvalue him; I know he is of little enough importance; if the world had
no other fault than that of not appreciating him, it would still be blameless. But within
the family circle I should not care to be without this son of mine. He contributes a
certain restlessness as well as a reverence for tradition, and combines them both, at
least that is how I feel it, into an incontestable whole. True, he knows less than anyone
what to do with this achievement; the wheel of the future will never be started rolling
by him; but his disposition is so stimulating, so rich in hope; I wish that he had
children and children's children. Unfortunately he does not seem inclined to fulfill my
wish. With a self-satisfaction that I understand as much as I deplore, and which stands
in magnificent contrast to the verdict of the world, he goes everywhere alone, pays no
attention to girls, and yet will never lose his good humor.
 My eighth son is my child of sorrow, and I do not really know why. He keeps
me at a distance and yet I feel a close paternal tie binding me to him. Time has done
much to lessen the pain; but once I used often to tremble at the mere thought of him.
He goes his own way; he has broken off all communication with me; and certainly with
his hard head, his small athletic body -- only his legs were rather frail when he was a
boy, but perhaps that has meanwhile righted itself -- he will make a success of
anything he chooses. Many a time I used to want to call him back, to ask him how
things really were with him, why he cut himself off so completely from his father, and
what his fundamental purpose was in life, but now he is so far away and so much time
has passed that things had better stay as they are. I hear that he is the only one of my
sons to grow a full beard; that cannot look well, of course, on a man so small as he is.
 My ninth son is very elegant and has what women consider a definitely melting
eye. So melting that there are occasions when he can cajole even me, although I know
that a wet sponge is literally enough to wipe away all that unearthly brilliance. But the
curious thing about the boy is that he makes no attempt to be seductive; he would be
content to spend his life lying on the sofa and wasting his glances on the ceiling, or still
better, keeping them to himself under his eyelids. When he is lying in this favorite
$ 462
position, he enjoys talking and talks quite well; concisely and pithily; but still only
within narrow limits; once he oversteps these, which he cannot avoid doing since they
are so narrow, what he says is quite empty. One would sign him to stop, if one had any
hope that such slumbrous eyes were even aware of the gesture.
 My tenth son is supposed to be an insincere character. I shall not entirely deny
or confirm this supposition. Certainly anyone who sees him approaching with the
pomposity of a man twice his age, in a frock coat always tightly buttoned, an old but
meticulously brushed black hat, with an expressionless face, slightly jutting chin,
protruding eyelids that mask the light behind them, two fingers very often at his lips --
anyone seeing him thus is bound to think: what an utter hypocrite. But then, just listen
to him talking! With understanding; thoughtfully; brusquely; cutting across questions
with satirical vivacity; in complete accord with the universe, an accord that is
surprising, natural and gay; an accord that of necessity straightens the neck and makes
the body proud. Many who think themselves very clever and for this reason, as they
fancied, felt a dislike for his outward appearance, have become strongly attached to
him because of his conversation. There are other people, again, who are unaffected by
his appearance but who find his conversation hypocritical. I, being his father, will not
pronounce a verdict, but I must admit that the latter critics are at least to be taken
more seriously than the former.
 My eleventh son is delicate, probably the frailest of my sons; but deceptive in
his weakness; for at times he can be strong and resolute, though even then there is
somehow always an underlying weakness. Yet it is not a weakness to be ashamed of,
merely something that appears as weakness only on this solid earth of ours. For
instance, is not a readiness for flight a kind of weakness too, since it consists in a
wavering, an unsteadiness, a fluttering? Something of that nature characterizes my
son. These are not, of course, the characteristics to rejoice a father; they tend
obviously to destroy a family. Sometimes he looks at me as if he would say: "I shall take
you with me, Father." Then I think: "You are the last person I would trust myself to."
$ 463
And again his look seems to say: "Then let me be at least the last."
 These are my eleven sons.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
My Neighbor
 MY BUSINESS rests entirely on my own shoulders. Two girl clerks with
typewriters and ledgers in the anteroom, my own room with writing desk, safe,
consulting table, easy chair, and telephone: such is my entire working apparatus. So
simple to control, so easy to direct. I'm quite young, and lots of business comes my
way. I don't complain, I don't complain.
 At the beginning of the year a young man snapped up the empty premises next
to mine, which very foolishly I had hesitated to rent until it was too late. They also
consist of a room and an anteroom, with a kitchen, however, thrown in -- the room
and anteroom I would certainly have found some use for, my two girl clerks feel
$ 464
somewhat overdriven as it is -- but what use would a kitchen have been to me? This
petty consideration was solely responsible for my allowing the premises to be snatched
from under my nose. Now that young man sits there. Harras, his name is. What he
actually does there I have no idea. On the door is a sign: "Harras Bureau." I have made
inquiries and I am told it is a business similar to mine. One can't exactly warn people
against extending the fellow credit, for after all he is a young and pushing man who
probably has a future; yet one can't go so far as to advise it, for by all appearances he
has no assets yet. The usual thing said by people who don't know.
 Sometimes I meet Harras on the stairs; he seems always to be in an
extraordinary hurry, for he literally shoots past me. I have never got a good look at him
yet, for his office key is always in his hand when he passes me. In a trice he has the
door open. Like the tail of a rat he has slipped through and I'm left standing again
before the sign "Harras Bureau," which I have read already far oftener than it deserves.
 The wretchedly thin walls betray the honorable and capable man, but shield
the dishonest. My telephone is fixed to the wall that separates me from my neighbor.
But I single that out merely as a particularly ironical circumstance. For even if it hung
on the opposite wall, everything could be heard in the next room. I have accustomed
myself to refrain from naming the names of my customers when speaking on the
telephone to them. But of course it does not need much skill to guess the names from
characteristic but unavoidable turns of the conversation. Sometimes I absolutely dance
with apprehension around the telephone, the receiver at my ear, and yet can't help
divulging secrets.
 Because of all this my business decisions have naturally become unsure, my
voice nervous. What is Harras doing while I am telephoning? If I wanted to exaggerate
-- and one must often do that so as to make things clear in one's mind -- I might assert
that Harras does not require a telephone, he uses mine, he pushes his sofa against the
wall and listens; while I at the other side must fly to the telephone, listen to all the
$ 465
requests of my customers, come to difficult and grave decisions, carry out long
calculations -- but worst of all, during all this time, involuntarily give Harras valuable
information through the wall.
 Perhaps he doesn't wait even for the end of the conversation, but gets up at the
point where the matter has become clear to him, flies through the town with his usual
haste, and, before I have hung up the receiver, is already at his goal working against
me.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
A Crossbreed
[A Sport]
 I HAVE a curious animal, half kitten, half lamb. It is a legacy from my father. But
it only developed in my time; formerly it was far more lamb than kitten. Now it is both
in about equal parts. From the cat it takes its head and claws, from the lamb its size
$ 466
and shape; from both its eyes, which are wild and flickering, its hair, which is soft,
lying close to its body, its movements, which partake both of skipping and slinking.
Lying on the window sill in the sun it curls up in a ball and purrs; out in the meadow it
rushes about like mad and is scarcely to be caught. It flees from cats and makes to
attack lambs. On moonlight nights its favorite promenade is along the eaves. It cannot
mew and it loathes rats. Beside the hen coop it can lie for hours in ambush, but it has
never yet seized an opportunity for murder.
 I feed it on milk; that seems to suit it best. In long draughts it sucks the milk in
through its fanglike teeth. Naturally it is a great source of entertainment for children.
Sunday morning is the visiting hour. I sit with the little beast on my knees, and the
children of the whole neighborhood stand around me.
 Then the strangest questions are asked, which no human being could answer:
Why there is only one such animal, why I rather than anybody else should own it,
whether there was ever an animal like it before and what would happen if it died,
whether it feels lonely, why it has no children, what it is called, etc.
 I never trouble to answer, but confine myself without further explanation to
exhibiting my possession. Sometimes the children bring cats with them; once they
actually brought two lambs. But against all their hopes there was no scene of
recognition. The animals gazed calmly at each other with their animal eyes, and
obviously accepted their reciprocal existence as a divine fact.
 Sitting on my knees, the beast knows neither fear nor lust of pursuit. Pressed
against me it is happiest. It remains faithful to the family that brought it up. In that
there is certainly no extraordinary mark of fidelity, but merely the true instinct of an
animal which, though it has countless step-relations in the world, has perhaps not a
single blood relation, and to which consequently the protection it has found with us is
sacred.
$ 467
 Sometimes I cannot help laughing when it sniffs around me and winds itself
between my legs and simply will not be parted from me. Not content with being lamb
and cat, it almost insists on being a dog as well. Once when, as may happen to anyone,
I could see no way out of my business problems and all that they involved, and was
ready to let everything go, and in this mood was lying in my rocking chair in my room,
the beast on my knees, I happened to glance down and saw tears dropping from its
huge whiskers. Were they mine, or were they the animal's? Had this cat, along with the
soul of a lamb, the ambitions of a human being? I did not inherit much from my
father, but this legacy is quite remarkable.
 It has the restlessness of both beasts, that of the cat and that of the lamb,
diverse as they are. For that reason its skin feels too tight for it. Sometimes it jumps up
on the armchair beside me, plants its front legs on my shoulder, and put its muzzle to
my ear. It is as if it were saying something to me, and as a matter of fact it turns its
head afterwards and gazes in my face to see the impression its communication has
made. And to oblige it I behave as if I had understood, and nod. Then it jumps to the
floor and dances about with joy.
 Perhaps the knife of the butcher would be a release for this animal; but as it is a
legacy I must deny it that. So it must wait until the breath voluntarily leaves its body,
even though it sometimes gazes at me with a look of human understanding,
challenging me to do the thing of which both of us are thinking.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 468
The Cares of a Family Man
 SOME SAY the word Odradek is of Slavonic origin, and try to account for it on
that basis. Others again believe it to be of German origin, only influenced by Slavonic.
The uncertainty of both interpretations allows one to assume with justice that neither
is accurate, especially as neither of them provides an intelligent meaning of the word.
 No one, of course, would occupy himself with such studies if there were not a
creature called Odradek. At first glance it looks like a flat star-shaped spool for thread,
and indeed it does seem to have thread wound upon it; to be sure, they are only old,
broken-off bits of thread, knotted and tangled together, of the most varied sorts and
colors. But it is not only a spool, for a small wooden crossbar sticks out of the middle
of the star, and another small rod is joined to that at a right angle. By means of this
latter rod on one side and one of the points of the star on the other, the whole thing
can stand upright as if on two legs.
 One is tempted to believe that the creature once had some sort of intelligible
shape and is now only a broken-down remnant. Yet this does not seem to be the case;
at least there is no sign of it; nowhere is there an unfinished or unbroken surface to
suggest anything of the kind; the whole thing looks senseless enough, but in its own
way perfectly finished. In any case, closer scrutiny is impossible, since Odradek is
extraordinarily nimble and can never be laid hold of.
$ 469
 He lurks by turns in the garret, the stairway, the lobbies, the entrance hall.
Often for months on end he is not to be seen; then he has presumably moved into
other houses; but he always comes faithfully back to our house again. Many a time
when you go out of the door and he happens just to be leaning directly beneath you
against the banisters you feel inclined to speak to him. Of course, you put no difficult
questions to him, you treat him -- he is so diminutive that you cannot help it -- rather
like a child. "Well, what's your name?" you ask him. "Odradek," he says. "And where do
you live?" "No fixed abode," he says and laughs; but it is only the kind of laughter that
has no lungs behind it. It sounds rather like the rustling of fallen leaves. And that is
usually the end of the conversation. Even these answers are not always forthcoming;
often he stays mute for a long time, as wooden as his appearance.
 I ask myself, to no purpose, what is likely to happen to him? Can he possibly
die? Anything that dies has had some kind of aim in life, s6me kind of activity, which
has worn out; but that does not apply to Odradek. Am I to suppose, then, that he will
always be rolling down the stairs, with ends of thread trailing after him, right before
the feet of my children, and my children's children? He does no harm to anyone that
one can see; but the idea that he is likely to survive me I find almost painful.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 470
A Common Contusion
 A COMMON EXPERIENCE,resulting in a common confusion. A. has to transact
important business with B. in H. He goes to H. for a preliminary interview,
accomplishes the journey there in ten minutes, and the journey back in the same time,
and on returning boasts to his family of his expedition. Next day he goes again to H.,
this time to settle his business finally. As that by all appearances will require several
hours, A. leaves very early in the morning. But although all the surrounding
circumstances, at least in A.'s estimation, are exactly the same as the day before, this
time it takes him ten hours to reach H. When he arrives there quite exhausted in the
evening he is informed that B., annoyed at his absence, had left half an hour before to
go to A.'s village, and that they must have passed each other on the road. A. is advised
to wait. But in his anxiety about his business he sets off at once and hurries home.
 This time he covers the distance, without paying any particular attention to the
fact, practically in an instant. At home he learns that B. had arrived quite early,
immediately after A.'s departure, indeed that he had met A. on the threshold and
reminded him of his business; but A. had replied that he had no time to spare, he must
go at once.
 In spite of this incomprehensible behavior of A., however, B. had stayed on to
wait for A.'s return. It is true, he had asked several times whether A. was not back yet,
but he was still sitting up in A.'s room. Overjoyed at the opportunity of seeing B. at
once and explaining everything to him, A. rushes upstairs. He is almost at the top,
when he stumbles, twists a sinew, and almost fainting with the pain, incapable even of
uttering a cry, only able to moan faintly in the darkness, he hears B. -- impossible to
tell whether at a great distance or quite near him -- stamping down the stairs in a
$ 471
violent rage and vanishing for good.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The Truth about Sancho Panza
 WITHOUT making any boast of it Sancho Panza succeeded in the course of
years, by feeding him a great number of romances of chivalry and adventure in the
evening and night hours, in so diverting from himself his demon, whom he later called
Don Quixote, that this demon thereupon set out, uninhibited, on the maddest
exploits, which, however, for the lack of a preordained object, which should have been
Sancho Panza himself, harmed nobody. A free man, Sancho Panza philosophically
followed Don Quixote on his crusades, perhaps out of a sense of responsibility, and
had of them a great and edifying entertainment to the end of his days.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 472
The Silence of the Sirens
 PROOF that inadequate, even childish measures may serve to rescue one from
peril:
 To protect himself from the Sirens Ulysses stopped his ears with wax and had
himself bound to the mast of his ship. Naturally any and every traveler before him
could have done the same, except those whom the Sirens allured even from a great
distance; but it was known to all the world that such things were of no help whatever.
The song of the Sirens could pierce through everything, and the longing of those they
seduced would have broken far stronger bonds than chains and masts. But Ulysses did
not think of that, although he had probably heard of it. He trusted absolutely to his
handful of wax and his fathom of chain, and in innocent elation over his little
stratagem sailed out to meet the Sirens.
 Now the Sirens have a still more fatal weapon than their song, namely their
silence. And though admittedly such a thing has never happened, still it is conceivable
that someone might possibly have escaped from their singing; but from their silence
certainly never. Against the feeling of having triumphed over them by one's own
$ 473
strength, and the consequent exaltation that bears down everything before it, no
earthly powers can resist.
 And when Ulysses approached them the potent songstresses actually did not
sing, whether because they thought that this enemy could be vanquished only by their
silence, or because the look of bliss on the face of Ulysses, who was thinking of nothing
but his wax and his chains, made them forget their singing.
 But Ulysses, if one may so express it, did not hear their silence; he thought they
were singing and that he alone did not hear them. For a fleeting moment he saw their
throats rising and falling, their breasts lifting, their eyes filled with tears, their lips halfparted, but believed that these were accompaniments to the airs which died unheard
around him. Soon, however, all this faded from his sight as he fixed his gaze on the
distance, the Sirens literally vanished before his resolution, and at the very moment
when they were nearest to him he knew of them no longer.
 But they -- lovelier than ever -- stretched their necks and turned, let their
awesome hair flutter free in the wind, and freely stretched their claws on the rocks.
They no longer had any desire to allure; all that they wanted was to hold as long as
they could the radiance that fell from Ulysses' great eyes.
 If the Sirens had possessed consciousness they would have been annihilated at
that moment. But they remained as they had been; all that had happened was that
Ulysses had escaped them.
 A codicil to the foregoing has also been handed down. Ulysses, it is said, was so
full of guile, was such a fox, that not even the goddess of fate could pierce his armor.
Perhaps he had really noticed, although here the human understanding is beyond its
depths, that the Sirens were silent, and held up to them and to the gods the
aforementioned pretense merely as a sort of shield.
$ 474
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Prometheus
 THERE ARE four legends concerning Prometheus:
 According to the first he was clamped to a rock in the Caucasus for betraying
the secrets of the gods to men, and the gods sent eagles to feed on his liver, which was
perpetually renewed.
 According to the second Prometheus, goaded by the pain of the tearing beaks,
pressed himself deeper and deeper into the rock until he became one with it.
 According to the third his treachery was forgotten in the course of thousands
of years, forgotten by the gods, the eagles, forgotten by himself.
 According to the fourth everyone grew weary of the meaningless affair. The
gods grew weary, the eagles grew weary, the wound closed wearily.
$ 475
 There remained the inexplicable mass of rock. The legend tried to explain the
inexplicable. As it came out of a substratum of truth it had in turn to end in the
inexplicable.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
The City Coat of Arms
 AT FIRST all the arrangements for building the Tower of Babel were
characterized by fairly good order; indeed the order was perhaps too perfect, too much
thought was given to guides, interpreters, accommodations for the workmen, and
roads of communication, as if there were centuries before one to do the work in. In
fact, the general opinion at that time was that one simply could not build too slowly; a
very little insistence on this would have sufficed to make one hesitate to lay the
foundations at all. People argued in this way: The essential thing in the whole business
is the idea of building a tower that will reach to heaven. In comparison with that idea
everything else is secondary. The idea, once seized in its magnitude, can never vanish
$ 476
again; so long as there are men on the earth there will be also the irresistible desire to
complete the building. That being so, however, one need have no anxiety about the
future; on the contrary, human knowledge is increasing, the art of building has made
progress and will make further progress, a piece of work which takes us a year may
perhaps be done in half the time in another hundred years, and better done, too, more
enduringly. So why exert oneself to the extreme limit of one's present powers? There
would be some sense in doing that only if it were likely that the tower could be
completed in one generation. But that is beyond all hope. It is far more likely that the
next generation with their perfected knowledge will find the work of their
predecessors bad, and tear down what has been built so as to begin anew. Such
thoughts paralyzed people's powers, and so they troubled less about the tower than the
construction of a city for the workmen. Every nationality wanted the finest quarter for
itself, and this gave rise to disputes, which developed into bloody conflicts. These
conflicts never came to an end; to the leaders they were a new proof that, in the
absence of the necessary unity, the building of the tower must be done very slowly, or
indeed preferably postponed until universal peace was declared. But the time was
spent not only in conflict; the town was embellished in the intervals, and this
unfortunately enough evoked fresh envy and fresh conflict. In this fashion the age of
the first generation went past, but none of the succeeding ones showed any difference;
except that technical skill increased and with it occasion for conflict. To this must be
added that the second or third generation had already recognized the senselessness of
building a heaven-reaching tower; but by that time everybody was too deeply involved
to leave the city.
 All the legends and songs that came to birth in that city are filled with longing
for a prophesied day when the city would be destroyed by five successive blows from a
gigantic fist. It is for that reason too that the city has a closed fist on its coat of arms.
$ 477
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Poseidon
 POSEIDON sat at his desk, going over the accounts. The administration of all the
waters gave him endless work. He could have had as many assistants as he wanted, and
indeed he had quite a number, but since he took his job very seriously he insisted on
going through all the accounts again himself, and so his assistants were of little help to
him. It cannot be said that he enjoyed the work; he carried it out simply because it was
assigned to him; indeed he had frequently applied for what he called more cheerful
work, but whenever various suggestions were put to him it turned out that nothing
suited him so well as his present employment. Needless to say, it was very difficult to
find him another job. After all, he could not possibly be put in charge of one particular
ocean. Quite apart from the fact that in this case the work involved would not be less,
only more petty, the great Poseidon could hold only a superior position. And when he
was offered a post unrelated to the waters, the very idea made him feel sick, his divine
breath came short and his brazen chest began to heave. As a matter of fact, no one
took his troubles very seriously; when a mighty man complains one must pretend to
yield, however hopeless the case may seem. No one ever really considered relieving
$ 478
Poseidon of his position; he had been destined to be God of the Seas since time
immemorial, and that was how it had to remain.
 What annoyed him most -- and this was the chief cause of discontent with his
job -- was to learn of the rumors that were circulating about him; for instance, that he
was constantly cruising through the waves with his trident. Instead of which here he
was sitting in the depths of the world's ocean endlessly going over the accounts, an
occasional journey to Jupiter being the only interruption of the monotony, a journey
moreover from which he invariably returned in a furious temper. As a result he had
hardly seen the oceans, save fleetingly during his hasty ascent to Olympus, and had
never really sailed upon them. He used to say that he was postponing this until the end
of the world, for then there might come a quiet moment when, just before the end and
having gone through the last account, he could still make a quick little tour.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
Fellowship
$ 479
 WE ARE five friends, one day we came out of a house one after the other, first
one came and placed himself beside the gate, then the second came, or rather he
glided through the gate like a little ball of quicksilver, and placed himself near the first
one, then came the third, then the fourth, then the fifth. Finally we all stood in a row.
People began to notice us, they pointed at us and said: Those five just came out of that
house. Since then we have been living together; it would be a peaceful life if it weren't
for a sixth one continually trying to interfere. He doesn't do us any harm, but he
annoys us, and that is harm enough; why does he intrude where he is not wanted? We
don't know him and don't want him to join us. There was a time, of course, when the
five of us did not know one another, either; and it could be said that we still don't
know one another, but what is possible and can be tolerated by the five of us is not
possible and cannot be tolerated with this sixth one. In any case, we are five and don't
want to be six. And what is the point of this continual being together anyhow? It is
also pointless for the five of us, but here we are together and will remain together; a
new combination, however, we do not want, just because of our experiences. But how
is one to make all this clear to the sixth one? Long explanations would almost amount
to accepting him in our circle, so we prefer not to explain and not to accept him. No
matter how he pouts his lips we push him away with our elbows, but however much
we push him away, back he comes.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 480
At Night
 DEEPLY LOST in the night. Just as one sometimes lowers one's head to reflect,
thus to be utterly lost in the night. All around people are asleep. It's just play acting, an
innocent self-deception, that they sleep in houses, in safe beds, under a safe roof,
stretched out or curled up on mattresses, in sheets, under blankets; in reality they have
flocked together as they had once upon a time and again later in a deserted region, a
camp in the open, a countless number of men, an army, a people, under a cold sky on
cold earth, collapsed where once they had stood, forehead pressed on the arm, face to
the ground, breathing quietly. And you are watching, are one of the watchmen, you
find the next one by brandishing a burning stick from the brushwood pile beside you.
Why are you watching? Someone must watch, it is said. Someone must be there.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
The Problem of Our Laws
$ 481
 OUR LAWS are not generally known; they are kept secret by the small group of
nobles who rule us. We are convinced that these ancient laws are scrupulously
administered; nevertheless it is an extremely painful thing to be ruled by laws that one
does not know. I am not thinking of possible discrepancies that may arise in the
interpretation of the laws, or of the disadvantages involved when only a few and not
the whole people are allowed to have a say in their interpretation. These disadvantages
are perhaps of no great importance. For the laws are very ancient; their interpretation
has been the work of centuries, and has itself doubtless acquired the status of law; and
though there is still a possible freedom of interpretation left, it has now become very
restricted. Moreover the nobles have obviously no cause to be influenced in their
interpretation by personal interests inimical to us, for the laws were made to the
advantage of the nobles from the very beginning, they themselves stand above the
laws, and that seems to be why the laws were entrusted exclusively into their hands. Of
course, there is wisdom in that -- who doubts the wisdom of the ancient laws? -- but
also hardship for us; probably that is unavoidable.
 The very existence of these laws, however, is at most a matter of presumption.
There is a tradition that they exist and that they are a mystery confided to the nobility,
but it is not and cannot be more than a mere tradition sanctioned by age, for the
essence of a secret code is that it should remain a mystery. Some of us among the
people have attentively scrutinized the doings of the nobility since the earliest times
and possess records made by our forefathers -- records which we have conscientiously
continued -- and claim to recognize amid the countless number of facts certain main
tendencies which permit of this or that historical formulation; but when in accordance
with these scrupulously tested and logically ordered conclusions we seek to adjust
ourselves somewhat for the present or the future, everything becomes uncertain, and
our work seems only an intellectual game, for perhaps these laws that we are trying to
unravel do not exist at all. There is a small party who are actually of this opinion and
$ 482
who try to show that, if any law exists, it can only be this: The Law is whatever the
nobles do. This party see everywhere only the arbitrary acts of the nobility, and reject
the popular tradition, which according to them possesses only certain trifling and
incidental advantages that do not offset its heavy drawbacks, for it gives the people a
false, deceptive, and overconfident security in confronting coming events. This cannot
be gainsaid, but the overwhelming majority of our people account for it by the fact
that the tradition is far from complete and must be more fully inquired into, that the
material available, prodigious as it looks, is still too meager, and that several centuries
will have to pass before it becomes really adequate. This view, so comfortless as far as
the present is concerned, is lightened only by the belief that a time will eventually
come when the tradition and our research into it will jointly reach their conclusion,
and as it were gain a breathing space, when everything will have become clear, the law
will belong to the people, and the nobility will vanish. This is not maintained in any
spirit of hatred against the nobility; not at all, and by no one. We are more inclined to
hate ourselves, because we have not yet shown ourselves worthy of being entrusted
with the laws. And that is the real reason why the party who believe that there is no
law have remained so few -- although their doctrine is in certain ways so attractive, for
it unequivocally recognizes the nobility and its right to go on existing. Actually one
can express the problem only in a sort of paradox: Any party that would repudiate not
only all belief in the laws, but the nobility as well, would have the whole people behind
it; yet no such party can come into existence, for nobody would dare to repudiate the
nobility. We live on this razor's edge. A writer once summed the matter up in this way:
The sole visible and indubitable law that is imposed upon us is the nobility, and must
we ourselves deprive ourselves of that one law?
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 483
The Conscription of Troops
 THE conscription of troops, often necessary on account of the never-ending
frontier wars, takes place in the following manner:
 The order goes out that on a certain day in a certain part of town all
inhabitants -- men, women, and children without exception -- have to remain indoors.
Usually at about noon the young nobleman in charge of the conscription appears at
the entrance of that part of town where a detachment of soldiers, both infantry and
cavalry, has been waiting since dawn. He is a young man, slender, not tall, weak,
carelessly dressed, with tired eyes, waves of restlessness continually passing through
him like the shivers of a fever. Without looking at anyone he makes a sign with a whip,
his sole equipment, whereupon several soldiers join him and he enters the first house.
A soldier, who knows personally all the inhabitants in this part of town, reads out the
list of the inmates. As a rule they are all present, lined up in the room, their eyes fixed
on the nobleman, as though they were soldiers already. It can happen, however, that
here and there someone, it's invariably a man, is missing. In this case no one will dare
to utter an excuse, let alone a lie, everyone is silent, all eyes are lowered, the pressure
of the command which someone in this house has evaded is almost unbearable, but
the silent presence of the nobleman keeps everyone nevertheless in his place. The
nobleman makes a sign, it's not even a nod, it can be read only in his eyes, and two
$ 484
soldiers begin the search for the missing man. This is not difficult. He is never out of
the house, never really intends to evade military service, it's only fear that has
prevented him from turning up, yet it's not fear of the service itself that keeps him
away, it's the general reluctance to show himself, for him the command is almost too
great, so frighteningly great that he cannot appear of his own accord. This is why he
does not flee, he simply goes into hiding, and on learning that the nobleman is in the
house he even leaves his hiding place and creeps to the door of the room where he is
promptly caught by the soldiers in search of him. He is brought before the nobleman
who seizes the whip with both hands -- he is so weak he can't do it with one hand --
and gives the man a thrashing. Having inflicted no great pain, he drops the whip, half
from exhaustion, half from disgust, whereupon the beaten man has to pick it up and
hand it to him. Only then may he join the line with the others; incidentally, it is almost
certain that he will not be recruited. But it also happens, and this is more frequent,
that a greater number of people appear than are listed. There, for instance, stands an
unknown girl, staring at the nobleman; she is from out of town, from the provinces
perhaps, the conscription has lured her here. There are many women who cannot
resist the temptation of a conscription in another town, conscriptions at home
meaning something quite different. And, strangely enough, it is not considered
disgraceful for a woman to surrender to this temptation; on the contrary, in the
opinion of many, this is something women have to go through, a debt which they pay
to their sex. Moreover, it invariably takes the same course. The girl or the woman
learns that somewhere, perhaps very far away, at the home of relatives or friends, a
conscription is going to take place; she asks her family for permission to undertake the
journey, which is granted -- it cannot very well be refused -- she puts on her best
clothes, is gayer than usual, at the same time calm and friendly, no matter what she
may be like at other times; and yet behind all the calm and friendliness she is
inaccessible, like an utter stranger who is on her way home and can think of nothing
else. In the family where the conscription is going to take place she is received quite
differently from an ordinary guest; everyone flatters her, she is invited to walk through
all the rooms in the house, lean out of all the windows, and if she puts her hand on
$ 485
someone's head it means more than a father's blessing. When the family is preparing
for the conscription she is given the best place, which is near the door where she has
the best chance of being seen by the nobleman and can best see him. She is honored in
this way, however, only until the nobleman enters; thereafter she begins to fade. He
looks at her as little as at the others, and even when his eye rests on someone, that
person is not aware of being looked at. This is something she has not expected or
rather she certainly has, for it cannot be otherwise, yet it wasn't the expectation of the
opposite that had driven her here, it was just something that had now definitely come
to an end. She feels shame to a degree which our women possibly feel at no other time;
only now is she fully aware of having forced her way into a foreign conscription, and
when the soldier has read out the list and her name is not on it and there comes a
moment of silence, she flees stooped and trembling out of the door, receiving in
addition a blow in the back from a soldier's fist.
 Should the person not on the list be a man, his only desire is to be conscripted
with the others although he does not belong to this house. But this too is utterly out of
the question, an outsider of this kind has never been conscripted and nothing of the
sort will ever happen.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 486
The Test
 I AM a servant, but there is no work for me. I am timid and don't push myself to
the fore, indeed I don't even push myself into line with the others, but that is only one
reason for my nonemployment, it's even possible that it has nothing to do with my
nonemployment, in any case the main thing is that I am not called upon to serve,
others have been called yet they have not tried harder than I, indeed perhaps they have
not even felt the desire to be called, whereas I, at least sometimes, have felt it very
strongly.
 So I lie on the pallet in the servants' hall, stare at the beams in the ceiling, fall
asleep, wake up, and promptly fall asleep again. Occasionally I walk over to the tavern
where they sell a sour beer, occasionally I have even poured away a glass in disgust, but
at other times I drink it. I like sitting there because from behind the closed little
window, without the possibility of being discovered, I can see across to the windows of
our house. Not that one sees very much there, to my knowledge only the windows of
the corridors look out on the street, and moreover not even those of the corridors
leading to my employers' apartments. But it is also possible that I am mistaken;
someone, without my having asked him, once said so, and the general impression of
this house front confirms this. Only rarely are the windows opened, and when this
does occur it is done by a servant who may lean against the balustrade to look down
for a while. It follows therefore that these are corridors where he cannot be taken by
surprise. As a matter of fact I am not personally acquainted with these servants; those
who are permanently employed upstairs sleep elsewhere, not in my room.
 Once when I arrived at the tavern, a guest was sitting at my observation post. I
did not dare look at him closely and was about to turn around in the door and leave.
$ 487
The guest, however, called me over, and it turned out that he too was a servant whom
I had once seen somewhere before, but without having spoken to him.
 "Why do you want to run away? Sit down and have a drink! I'll pay." So I sat
down. He asked me several things, but I couldn't answer, indeed I didn't even
understand his questions. So I said: "Perhaps you are sorry now that you invited me, so
I'd better go," and I was about to get up. But he stretched his hand out over the table
and pressed me down. "Stay," he said, "that was only a test. He who does not answer
the questions has passed the test."
Translated by Tania and James Stern
The Vulture
 A VULTURE was hacking at my feet. It had already torn my boots and stockings
to shreds, now it was hacking at the feet themselves. Again and again it struck at them,
then circled several times restlessly around me, then returned to continue its work. A
gentleman passed by, looked on for a while, then asked me why I suffered the vulture.
$ 488
"I'm helpless," I said. "When it came and began to attack me, I of course tried to drive
it away, even to strangle it, but these animals are very strong, it was about to spring at
my face, but I preferred to sacrifice my feet. Now they are almost torn to bits." "Fancy
letting yourself be tortured like this!" said the gentleman. "One shot and that's the end
of the vulture." "Really?" I said. "And would you do that?" "With pleasure," said the
gentleman, "I've only got to go home and get my gun. Could you wait another halfhour?" "I'm not sure about that," said I, and stood for a moment rigid with pain. Then I
said: "Do try it in any case, please." "Very well," said the gentleman, "I'll be as quick as I
can." During this conversation the vulture had been calmly listening, letting its eye
rove between me and the gentleman. Now I realized that it had understood everything;
it took wing, leaned far back to gain impetus, and then, like a javelin thrower, thrust its
beak through my mouth, deep into me. Falling back, I was relieved to feel him
drowning irretrievably in my blood, which was filling every depth, flooding every
shore.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
The Helmsman
$ 489
 "Am I NOT the helmsman here?" I called out. "You?" asked a tall, dark man and
passed his hands over his eyes as though to banish a dream. I had been standing at the
helm in the dark night, a feeble lantern burning over my head, and now this man had
come and tried to push me aside. And as I would not yield, he put his foot on my chest
and slowly crushed me while I still clung to the hub of the helm, wrenching it around
in falling. But the man seized it, pulled it back in place, and pushed me away. I soon
collected myself, however, ran to the hatchway which gave on to the mess quarters,
and cried out: "Men! Comrades! Come here, quick! A stranger has driven me away
from the helm!" Slowly they came up, climbing the companion ladder, tired, swaying,
powerful figures. "Am I the helmsman?" I asked. They nodded, but they had eyes only
for the stranger, stood around him in a semicircle, and when, in a commanding voice,
he said: "Don't disturb me!" they gathered together, nodded at me, and withdrew down
the companion ladder. What kind of people are these? Do they ever think, or do they
only shuffle pointlessly over the earth?
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 490
The Top
 A CERTAIN PHILOSOPHER used to hang about wherever children were at play.
And whenever he saw a boy with a top, he would lie in wait. As soon as the top began
to spin the philosopher went in pursuit and tried to catch it. He was not perturbed
when the children noisily protested and tried to keep him away from their toy; so long
as he could catch the top while it was still spinning, he was happy, but only for a
moment; then he threw it to the ground and walked away. For he believed that the
understanding of any detail, that of a spinning top, for instance, was sufficient for the
understanding of all things. For this reason he did not busy himself with great
problems, it seemed to him uneconomical. Once the smallest detail was understood,
then everything was understood, which was why he busied himself only with the
spinning top. And whenever preparations were being made for the spinning of the top,
he hoped that this time it would succeed: as soon as the top began to spin and he was
running breathlessly after it, the hope would turn to certainty, but when he held the
silly piece of wood in his hand, he felt nauseated. The screaming of the children, which
hitherto he had not heard and which now suddenly pierced his ears, chased him away,
and he tottered like a top under a clumsy whip.
Translated by Tania and ]ames Stern
$ 491
A Little Fable
 "ALAS,"said the mouse, "the world is growing smaller every day. At the
beginning it was so big that I was afraid, I kept running and running, and I was glad
when at last I saw walls far away to the right and left, but these long walls have
narrowed so quickly that I am in the last chamber already, and there in the corner
stands the trap that I must run into." "You only need to change your direction," said
the cat, and ate it up.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Home-Coming
$ 492
 I HAVE RETURNED, I have passed under the arch and am looking around. It's my
father's old yard. The puddle in the middle. Old, useless tools, jumbled together, block
the way to the attic stairs. The cat lurks on the banister. A torn piece of cloth, once
wound around a stick in a game, flutters in the breeze. I have arrived. Who is going to
receive me? Who is waiting behind the kitchen door? Smoke is rising from the
chimney, coffee is being made for supper. Do you feel you belong, do you feel at home?
I don't know, I feel most uncertain. My father's house it is, but each object stands cold
beside the next, as though preoccupied with its own affairs, which I have partly
forgotten, partly never known. What use can I be to them, what do I mean to them,
even though I am the son of my father, the old farmer? And I don't dare knock at the
kitchen door, I only listen from a distance, I only listen from a distance, standing up, in
such a way that I cannot be taken by surprise as an eavesdropper. And since I am
listening from a distance, I hear nothing but a faint striking of the clock passing over
from childhood days, but perhaps I only think I hear it. Whatever else is going on in
the kitchen is the secret of those sitting there, a secret they are keeping from me. The
longer one hesitates before the door, the more estranged one becomes. What would
happen if someone were to open the door now and ask me a question? Would not I
myself then behave like one who wants to keep his secret?
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 493
First Sorrow
 A TRAPEZE ARTIST -- this art, practiced high in the vaulted domes of the great
variety theaters, is admittedly one of the most difficult humanity can achieve -- had so
arranged his life that, as long as he kept working in the same building, he never came
down from his trapeze by night or day, at first only from a desire to perfect his skill,
but later because custom was too strong for him. All his needs, very modest needs at
that, were supplied by relays of attendants who watched from below and sent up and
hauled down again in specially constructed containers whatever he required. This way
of living caused no particular inconvenience to the theatrical people, except that, when
other turns were on the stage, his being still up aloft, which could not be dissembled,
proved somewhat distracting, as also the fact that, although at such times he mostly
kept very still, he drew a stray glance here and there from the public. Yet the
management overlooked this, because he was an extraordinary and unique artist. And
of course they recognized that this mode of life was no mere prank, and that only in
this way could he really keep himself in constant practice and his art at the pitch of its
perfection.
 Besides, it was quite healthful up there, and when in the warmer seasons of the
year the side windows all around the dome of the theater were thrown open and sun
and fresh air came pouring irresistibly into the dusky vault, it was even beautiful. True,
his social life was somewhat limited, only sometimes a fellow acrobat swarmed up the
ladder to him, and then they both sat on the trapeze, leaning left and right against the
supporting ropes, and chatted, or builders' workmen repairing the roof exchanged a
few words with him through an open window, or the fireman, inspecting the
emergency lighting in the top gallery, called over to him something that sounded
respectful but could hardly be made out. Otherwise nothing disturbed his seclusion;
$ 494
occasionally, perhaps, some theater hand straying through the empty theater of an
afternoon gazed thoughtfully up into the great height of the roof, almost beyond
eyeshot, where the trapeze artist, unaware that he was being observed, practiced his
art or rested.
 The trapeze artist could have gone on living peacefully like that, had it not been
for the inevitable journeys from place to place, which he found extremely trying. Of
course his manager saw to it that his sufferings were not prolonged one moment more
than necessary; for town travel, racing automobiles were used, which whirled him, by
night if possible or in the earliest hours of the morning, through the empty streets at
breakneck speed, too slow all the same for the trapeze artist's impatience; for railway
journeys, a whole compartment was reserved, in which the trapeze artist, as a possible
though wretched alternative to his usual way of living, could pass the time up on the
luggage rack; in the next town on their circuit, long before he arrived, the trapeze was
already slung up in the theater and all the doors leading to the stage were flung wide
open, all corridors kept free -- yet the manager never knew a happy moment until the
trapeze artist set his foot on the rope ladder and in a twinkling, at long last, hung aloft
on his trapeze.
 Despite so many journeys having been successfully arranged by the manager,
each new one embarrassed him again, for the journeys, apart from everything else, got
on the nerves of the artist a great deal.
 Once when they were again traveling together, the trapeze artist lying on the
luggage rack dreaming, the manager leaning back in the opposite window seat reading
a book, the trapeze artist addressed his companion in a low voice. The manager was
immediately all attention. The trapeze artist, biting his lips, said that he must always in
future have two trapezes for his performance instead of only one, two trapezes
opposite each other. The manager at once agreed. But the trapeze artist, as if to show
that the manager's consent counted for as little as his refusal, said that never again
$ 495
would he perform on only one trapeze, in no circumstances whatever. The very idea
that it might happen at all seemed to make him shudder. The manager, watchfully
feeling his way, once more emphasized his entire agreement, two trapezes were better
than one, besides it would be an advantage to have a second bar, more variety could be
introduced into the performance. At that the trapeze artist suddenly burst into tears.
Deeply distressed, the manager sprang to his feet and asked what was the matter, then
getting no answer climbed up on the seat and caressed him, cheek to cheek, so that his
own face was bedabbled by the trapeze artist's tears. Yet it took much questioning and
soothing endearment until the trapeze artist sobbed: "Only the one bar in my hands --
how can I go on living!" That made it somewhat easier for the manager to comfort
him; he promised to wire from the very next station for a second trapeze to be
installed in the first town on their circuit; reproached himself for having let the artist
work so long on only one trapeze; and thanked and praised him warmly for having at
last brought the mistake to his notice. And so he succeeded in reassuring the trapeze
artist, little by little, and was able to go back to his corner. But he himself was far from
reassured, with deep uneasiness he kept glancing secretly at the trapeze artist over the
top of his book. Once such ideas began to torment him, would they ever quite leave
him alone? Would they not rather increase in urgency? Would they not threaten his
very existence? And indeed the manager believed he could see, during the apparently
peaceful sleep which had succeeded the fit of tears, the first furrows of care engraving
themselves upon the trapeze artist's smooth, childlike forehead.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
$ 496
The Departure
 I ORDERED my horse to be brought from the stables. The servant did not
understand my orders. So I went to the stables myself, saddled my horse, and
mounted. In the distance I heard the sound of a trumpet, and I asked the servant what
it meant. He knew nothing and had heard nothing. At the gate he stopped me and
asked: "Where is the master going?" "I don't know," I said, "just out of here, just out of
here. Out of here, nothing else, it's the only way I can reach my goal." "So you know
your goal?" he asked. "Yes," I replied, "I've just told you. Out of here -- that's my goal."
Translated by Tania and James Stern
Advocates
$ 497
 I WAS not at all certain whether I had any advocates, I could not find out
anything definite about it, every face was unfriendly, most people who came toward
me and whom I kept meeting in the corridors looked like fat old women; they had
huge blue-and-white striped aprons covering their entire bodies, kept stroking their
stomachs and swaying awkwardly to and fro. I could not even find out whether we
were in a law court. Some facts spoke for it, others against. What reminded me of a
law court more than all the details was a droning noise which could be heard
incessantly in the distance; one could not tell from which direction it came, it filled
every room to such an extent that one had to assume it came from everywhere, or,
what seemed more likely, that just the place where one happened to be standing was
the very place where the droning originated, but this was probably an illusion, for it
came from a distance. These corridors, narrow and austerely vaulted, turning in
gradual curves with high, sparsely decorated doors, seemed to have been created
specially for profound silence; they were the corridors of a museum or a library. Yet if
it were not a law court, why was I searching for an advocate here? Because I was
searching for an advocate everywhere; he is needed everywhere, if anything less in
court than elsewhere, for a court, one assumes, passes judgment according to the law.
If one were to assume that this was being done unfairly or frivolously, then life would
not be possible; one must have confidence that the court allows the majesty of the law
its full scope, for this is its sole duty. Within the law all is accusation, advocacy, and
verdict; any interference by an individual here would be a crime. It is different,
however, in the case of the verdict itself; this is based on inquiries being made here and
there, from relatives and strangers, from friends and enemies, in the family and public
life, in town and village -- in short, everywhere. Here it is most necessary to have
advocates, advocates galore, the best possible advocates, one next to the other, a living
wall, for advocates are by nature hard to set in motion; the plaintiffs, however, those
sly foxes, those slinking weasels, those little mice, they slip through the tiniest gaps,
scuttle through the legs of the advocates. So look out! That's why I am here, I'm
$ 498
collecting advocates. But I have not found any as yet, only those old women keep on
coming and going; if I were not on my search it would put me to sleep. I'm not in the
right place -- alas, I cannot rid myself of the feeling that I'm not in the right place. I
ought to be in a place where all kinds of people meet, from various parts of the
country, from every class, every profession, of all ages; I ought to have an opportunity
of choosing carefully out of a crowd those who are kind, those who are able, and those
who have an eye for me. Perhaps the most suitable place for this would be a huge
fairground; instead of which I am hanging about in these corridors where only these
old women are to be seen, and not even many of them, and always the same ones, and
even those few will not let themselves be cornered, despite their slowness; they slip
away from me, float about like rain clouds, and are completely absorbed by unknown
activities. Why is it then that I run headlong into a house without reading the sign
over the door, promptly find myself in these corridors, and settle here with such
obstinacy that I cannot even remember ever having been in front of the house, ever
having run up the stairs! But back I cannot go, this waste of time, this admission of
having been on the wrong track would be unbearable for me. What? Run downstairs in
this brief, hurried life accompanied as it is by that impatient droning? Impossible. The
time allotted to you is so short that if you lose one second you have already lost your
whole life, for it is no longer, it is always just as long as the time you lose. So if you
have started out on a walk, continue it whatever happens; you can only gain, you run
no risk, in the end you may fall over a precipice perhaps, but had you turned back after
the first steps and run downstairs you would have fallen at once -- and not perhaps,
but for certain. So if you find nothing in the corridors open the doors, if you find
nothing behind these doors there are more floors, and if you find nothing up there,
don't worry, just leap up another flight of stairs. As long as you don't stop climbing,
the stairs won't end, under your climbing feet they will go on growing upwards.
Translated by Tania and James Stern
$ 499
The Married Couple
 BUSINESS in general is so bad that sometimes, when my work in the office leaves
me a little time, I myself pick up the case of samples and call on my customers
personally. Long since I had intended to visit sometime, among others, N., with whom
once I had constant business relations, which, however, during the last year have
almost completely lapsed for some reason unknown to me. Besides, there need not
always be real reasons for such disruptions; in the present unstable state of affairs
often a mere nothing, a mood, will turn the scale, and in the same way a mere nothing,
a word, can put things right again. To gain admittance to N., however, is a somewhat
ticklish business; he is an old man, grown somewhat infirm too of late, and though he
still insists on attending to business matters himself, he is hardly ever to be seen in his
office; if you want to speak to him you have to go to his house, and one likes to put off
a business call of that kind.
 Last evening after six I nevertheless set out for his house; it was really no time
for paying calls, but my visit after all was a business, not a social, one, and might be
regarded accordingly. I was in luck. N. was in; he had just come back with his wife
from a walk, the servant told me, and was now in the bedroom of his son, who was
$ 500
unwell and confined to his bed. I was requested to go there; at first I hesitated, but
then the desire to get my disagreeable visit over as quickly as possible turned the scale,
and I allowed myself to be conducted as I was, in my overcoat and hat, with my case of
samples, through a dark room into a faintly lit one, where a small company was
gathered.
 My first glance fell, probably by instinct, on an agent only too well known to
me, a trade rival of myself in some respects. So he had stolen a march on me, it
seemed. He was sitting comfortably by the bed of the sick man, just as if he were a
doctor; he sat there brazenly in his beautiful ample overcoat, which was unbuttoned;
the sick man too probably had his own thoughts as he lay there with his cheeks faintly
flushed with fever, now and then glancing at his visitor. He was no longer young
either, N.'s son, a man of about my own age with a short beard, somewhat unkempt on
account of his illness. Old N., a tall, broad-shouldered man, but to my astonishment
grown very thin because of some creeping malady, bent and infirm, was still wearing
the fur coat in which he had entered, and mumbling something to his son. His wife,
small and frail, but immensely vivacious, yet only when she spoke to him -- us others
she scarcely noticed -- was occupied in helping him to take off his overcoat, which,
considering the great difference in their height, was a matter of some difficulty, but at
last was achieved. Perhaps, indeed, the real difficulty was caused by N.'s impatience,
for with restless hands he kept on feeling for the easy chair, which his wife, after the
overcoat was off, quickly pushed forward for him. She herself then took up the fur
coat, beneath which she almost vanished, and carried it out.
 Now at last, it seemed to me, my moment had come, or rather it had not come
and probably would never come; yet if I was to attempt anything it must be done at
once, for I felt that here the conditions for a business interview could only become
increasingly unfavorable; and to plant myself down here for all time, as the agent
apparently intended, was not my way: besides, I did not want to take the slightest
notice of him. So I began without ceremony to state my business, although I saw that
$ 501
N. would have liked at that moment to have a chat with his son. Unfortunately I have a
habit when I have worked myself up -- and that takes a very short time, and on this
occasion took a shorter time than usual -- of getting up and walking about while I am
talking. Though a very good arrangement in one's own office, in a strange house it may
be somewhat burdensome. But I could not restrain myself, particularly as I was feeling
the lack of my usual cigarette. Well, every man has his bad habits, yet I can
congratulate myself on mine when I think of the agent's. For what is to be said of his
behavior, of the fact, for instance, that every now and then he would suddenly and
quite unexpectedly clap his hat on his head; he had been holding it on his knee until
then, slowly pushing it up and down there. True, he took it off again immediately, as if
he had made a blunder, but he had had it on his head nevertheless for a second or two,
and besides he repeated this performance again and again every few minutes. Surely
such conduct must be called unpardonable. It did not disturb me, however, I walked
up and down, completely absorbed in my own proposals, and ignored him; but there
are people whom that trick with the hat might have put off completely. However,
when I am thoroughly worked up I disregard not only such annoyances as these, but
everything. I see, it is true, all that is going on, but do not admit it, so to speak, to my
consciousness until I am finished, or until some objection is raised. Thus I noticed
quite well, for instance, that N. was by no means in a receptive state; holding on to the
arms of his chair, he twisted about uncomfortably, never even glanced up at me, but
gazed blankly, as if searching for something, into vacancy, and his face was so
impassive that one might have thought no syllable of what I was saying, indeed no
awareness of my presence, had penetrated to him. Yes, his whole bearing, the bearing
of a sick man, in itself inauspicious for me, I took in quite well; nevertheless I talked on
as if I had still some prospect of putting everything right again by my talk, by the
advantageous offers I made -- I was myself alarmed by the concessions I granted,
concessions that had not even been asked for. It gave me a certain satisfaction also to
notice that the agent, as I verified by a fleeting glance, had at last left his hat in peace
and folded his arms across his chest; my performance, which was partly, I must
confess, intended for him, seemed to have given a severe blow to his designs. And in
$ 502
the elation produced by this result I might perhaps have gone on talking for a long
time still, if the son, whom until now I had regarded as a secondary factor in my plans,
had not suddenly raised himself in his bed and pulled me up by shaking his fist.
Obviously he wanted to say something, to point out something, but he had not
strength enough. At first I thought that his mind was wandering, but when I
involuntarily glanced at old N. I understood better.
 N. sat with wide-open, glassy, bulging eyes, which seemed on the point of
failing; he was trembling and his body was bent forward as if someone were holding
him down or striking him on the shoulders; his lower lip, indeed the lower jaw itself
with the exposed gums, hung down helplessly; his whole face seemed out of joint; he
still breathed, though with difficulty; but then, as if released, he fell back against the
back of his chair, closed his eyes, the mark of some great strain passed over his face
and vanished, and all was over. I sprang to him and seized his lifeless hand, which was
so cold that it sent a chill through me; no pulse beat there now. So it was all over. Still,
he was a very old man. We would be fortunate if we all had such an easy death. But
how much there was to be done! And what should one do first? I looked around for
help; but the son had drawn the bedclothes over his head, and I could hear his wild
sobbing; the agent, cold as a fish, sat immovably on his chair, two steps from N., and
was obviously resolved to do nothing, to wait for what time would bring; so I, only I
was left to do something, and the hardest thing that anyone could be asked to do, that
was to tell the news to his wife in some bearable form, in a form that did not exist, in
other words. And already I could hear her eager shuffling steps in the next room.
 Still wearing her outdoor clothes -- she had not found time to change -- she
brought in a nightshirt that she had warmed before the fire for her husband to put on.
"He's fallen asleep," she said, smiling and shaking her head, when she found us sitting
so still. And with the infinite trustfulness of the innocent she took up the same hand
that I had held a moment before with such fear and repugnance, kissed it playfully,
and -- how could we three others have borne the sight? -- N. moved, yawned loudly,
$ 503
allowed his nightshirt to be put on, endured with a mixture of annoyance and irony his
wife's tender reproaches for having overstrained himself by taking such a long walk,
and strangely enough said in reply, to provide no doubt a different explanation for his
having fallen asleep, something about feeling bored. Then, so as not to catch cold by
going through the draughty passage into a different room, he lay down for the time
being in his son's bed; his head was bedded down beside his son's feet on two cushions
hastily brought by his wife. After all that had gone before I found nothing particularly
odd in that. Then he asked for the evening paper, opened it without paying any
attention to his guests, but did not read it, only glancing through it here and there, and
made several very unpleasant observations on our offers, observations which showed
astonishing shrewdness, while he waved his free hand disdainfully, and by clicking his
tongue indicated that our business methods had left a bad taste in his mouth. The
agent could not refrain from making one or two untimely remarks, no doubt he felt in
his insensitive way that some compensation was due to him after what had happened,
but his way of. securing it was the worst he could have chosen. I said goodbye as soon
as I could, I felt almost grateful to the agent; if he had not been there I would not have
had the resolution to leave so soon.
 In the lobby I met Frau N. again. At the sight of that pathetic figure I said
impulsively that she reminded me a little of my mother. And as she remained silent I
added: "Whatever people say, she could do wonders. Things that we destroyed she
could make whole again. I lost her when I was still a child." I had spoken with
deliberate slowness and distinctness, for I assumed the old lady was hard of hearing.
But she must have been quite deaf, for she asked without transition: "And how does
my husband look to you?" From a few parting words I noticed, moreover, that she
confused me with the agent; I like to think that otherwise she would have been more
forthcoming.
 Then I descended the stairs: The descent was more tiring than the ascent had
been, and not even that had been easy. Oh, how many business calls come to nothing,
$ 504
and yet one must keep going.
Translated by Willa and Edwin Muir
Give it Up!
 IT WAS very early in the morning, the streets clean and deserted, I was on my
way to the station. As I compared the tower clock with my watch I realized it was
much later than I had thought and that I had to hurry; the shock of this discovery
made me feel uncertain of the way, I wasn't very well acquainted with the town as yet;
fortunately, there was a policeman at hand, I ran to him and breathlessly asked him
the way. He smiled and said: "You asking me the way?" "Yes," I said, "since I can't find
it myself." "Give it up! Give it up!" said he, and turned with a sudden jerk, like someone
who wants to be alone with his laughter.









The Trial by Franz Kafka.
First published in 1925.
This is a translation by David Wyllie.
This ebook edition was created and published by Global Grey in 2018,
and updated on the 16th April 2023.
The artwork used for the cover is ‘The Head of the Prisoner’
painted by Nikolai Yaroshenko.
This book can be found on the site here:
30TUglobalgreyebooks.com/trial-ebook.htmlU30T
©Global Grey 2023
globalgreyebooks.com
Contents
Chapter I
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Chapter VIII
Chapter IX
Chapter X
Chapter I
Arrest—Conversation with Mrs. Grubach—Then Miss Bürstner
Someone must have been telling lies about Josef K., he knew he had done nothing wrong but,
one morning, he was arrested. Every day at eight in the morning he was brought his breakfast
by Mrs. Grubach's cook—Mrs. Grubach was his landlady—but today she didn't come. That
had never happened before. K. waited a little while, looked from his pillow at the old woman
who lived opposite and who was watching him with an inquisitiveness quite unusual for her,
and finally, both hungry and disconcerted, rang the bell. There was immediately a knock at
the door and a man entered. He had never seen the man in this house before. He was slim but
firmly built, his clothes were black and close-fitting, with many folds and pockets, buckles
and buttons and a belt, all of which gave the impression of being very practical but without
making it very clear what they were actually for. "Who are you?" asked K., sitting half
upright in his bed. The man, however, ignored the question as if his arrival simply had to be
accepted, and merely replied, "You rang?" "Anna should have brought me my breakfast,"
said K. He tried to work out who the man actually was, first in silence, just through
observation and by thinking about it, but the man didn't stay still to be looked at for very
long. Instead he went over to the door, opened it slightly, and said to someone who was
clearly standing immediately behind it, "He wants Anna to bring him his breakfast." There
was a little laughter in the neighbouring room, it was not clear from the sound of it whether
there were several people laughing. The strange man could not have learned anything from it
that he hadn't known already, but now he said to K., as if making his report "It is not
possible." "It would be the first time that's happened," said K., as he jumped out of bed and
quickly pulled on his trousers. "I want to see who that is in the next room, and why it is that
Mrs. Grubach has let me be disturbed in this way." It immediately occurred to him that he
needn't have said this out loud, and that he must to some extent have acknowledged their
authority by doing so, but that didn't seem important to him at the time. That, at least, is how
the stranger took it, as he said, "Don't you think you'd better stay where you are?" "I want
neither to stay here nor to be spoken to by you until you've introduced yourself." "I meant it
for your own good," said the stranger and opened the door, this time without being asked.
The next room, which K. entered more slowly than he had intended, looked at first glance
exactly the same as it had the previous evening. It was Mrs. Grubach's living room, overfilled with furniture, tablecloths, porcelain and photographs. Perhaps there was a little more
space in there than usual today, but if so it was not immediately obvious, especially as the
main difference was the presence of a man sitting by the open window with a book from
which he now looked up. "You should have stayed in your room! Didn't Franz tell you?"
"And what is it you want, then?" said K., looking back and forth between this new
acquaintance and the one named Franz, who had remained in the doorway. Through the open
window he noticed the old woman again, who had come close to the window opposite so that
she could continue to see everything. She was showing an inquisitiveness that really made it
seem like she was going senile. "I want to see Mrs. Grubach ...," said K., making a movement
as if tearing himself away from the two men—even though they were standing well away
from him—and wanted to go. "No," said the man at the window, who threw his book down
on a coffee table and stood up. "You can't go away when you're under arrest." "That's how it
seems," said K. "And why am I under arrest?" he then asked. "That's something we're not
allowed to tell you. Go into your room and wait there. Proceedings are underway and you'll
learn about everything all in good time. It's not really part of my job to be friendly towards
1
you like this, but I hope no-one, apart from Franz, will hear about it, and he's been more
friendly towards you than he should have been, under the rules, himself. If you carry on
having as much good luck as you have been with your arresting officers then you can reckon
on things going well with you." K. wanted to sit down, but then he saw that, apart from the
chair by the window, there was nowhere anywhere in the room where he could sit. "You'll get
the chance to see for yourself how true all this is," said Franz and both men then walked up to
K. They were significantly bigger than him, especially the second man, who frequently
slapped him on the shoulder. The two of them felt K.'s nightshirt, and said he would now
have to wear one that was of much lower quality, but that they would keep the nightshirt
along with his other underclothes and return them to him if his case turned out well. "It's
better for you if you give us the things than if you leave them in the storeroom," they said.
"Things have a tendency to go missing in the storeroom, and after a certain amount of time
they sell things off, whether the case involved has come to an end or not. And cases like this
can last a long time, especially the ones that have been coming up lately. They'd give you the
money they got for them, but it wouldn't be very much as it's not what they're offered for
them when they sell them that counts, it's how much they get slipped on the side, and things
like that lose their value anyway when they get passed on from hand to hand, year after year."
K. paid hardly any attention to what they were saying, he did not place much value on what
he may have still possessed or on who decided what happened to them. It was much more
important to him to get a clear understanding of his position, but he could not think clearly
while these people were here, the second policeman's belly—and they could only be
policemen—looked friendly enough, sticking out towards him, but when K. looked up and
saw his dry, bony face it did not seem to fit with the body. His strong nose twisted to one side
as if ignoring K. and sharing an understanding with the other policeman. What sort of people
were these? What were they talking about? What office did they belong to? K. was living in a
free country, after all, everywhere was at peace, all laws were decent and were upheld, who
was it who dared accost him in his own home. He was always inclined to take life as lightly
as he could, to cross bridges when he came to them, pay no heed for the future, even when
everything seemed under threat. But here that did not seem the right thing to do. He could
have taken it all as a joke, a big joke set up by his colleagues at the bank for some unknown
reason, or also perhaps because today was his thirtieth birthday, it was all possible of course,
maybe all he had to do was laugh in the policemen's face in some way and they would laugh
with him, maybe they were tradesmen from the corner of the street, they looked like they
might be—but he was nonetheless determined, ever since he first caught sight of the one
called Franz, not to lose any slight advantage he might have had over these people. There was
a very slight risk that people would later say he couldn't understand a joke, but—although he
wasn't normally in the habit of learning from experience—he might also have had a few
unimportant occasions in mind when, unlike his more cautious friends, he had acted with no
thought at all for what might follow and had been made to suffer for it. He didn't want that to
happen again, not this time at least; if they were play-acting he would act along with them.
He still had time. "Allow me," he said, and hurried between the two policemen through into
his room. "He seems sensible enough," he heard them say behind him. Once in his room, he
quickly pulled open the drawer of his writing desk, everything in it was very tidy but in his
agitation he was unable to find the identification documents he was looking for straight away.
He finally found his bicycle permit and was about to go back to the policemen with it when it
seemed to him too petty, so he carried on searching until he found his birth certificate. Just as
he got back in the adjoining room the door on the other side opened and Mrs. Grubach was
about to enter. He only saw her for an instant, for as soon as she recognised K. she was
clearly embarrassed, asked for forgiveness and disappeared, closing the door behind her very
carefully. "Do come in," K. could have said just then. But now he stood in the middle of the
2
room with his papers in his hand and still looking at the door which did not open again. He
stayed like that until he was startled out of it by the shout of the policeman who sat at the
little table at the open window and, as K. now saw, was eating his breakfast. "Why didn't she
come in?" he asked. "She's not allowed to," said the big policeman. "You're under arrest,
aren't you?" "But how can I be under arrest? And how come it's like this?" "Now you're
starting again," said the policeman, dipping a piece of buttered bread in the honeypot. "We
don't answer questions like that." "You will have to answer them," said K. "Here are my
identification papers, now show me yours and I certainly want to see the arrest warrant." "Oh,
my God!" said the policeman. "In a position like yours, and you think you can start giving
orders, do you. It won't do you any good to get us on the wrong side, even if you think it
will—we're probably more on your side that anyone else you know!" "That's true, you know,
you'd better believe it," said Franz, holding a cup of coffee in his hand which he did not lift to
his mouth but looked at K. in a way that was probably meant to be full of meaning but could
not actually be understood. K. found himself, without intending it, in a mute dialogue with
Franz, but then slapped his hand down on his papers and said, "Here are my identity
documents." "And what do you want us to do about it?" replied the big policeman, loudly.
"The way you're carrying on, it's worse than a child. What is it you want? Do you want to get
this great, bloody trial of yours over with quickly by talking about ID and arrest warrants
with us? We're just coppers, that's all we are. Junior officers like us hardly know one end of
an ID card from another, all we've got to do with you is keep an eye on you for ten hours a
day and get paid for it. That's all we are. Mind you, what we can do is make sure that the high
officials we work for find out just what sort of person it is they're going to arrest, and why he
should be arrested, before they issue the warrant. There's no mistake there. Our authorities as
far as I know, and I only know the lowest grades, don't go out looking for guilt among the
public; it's the guilt that draws them out, like it says in the law, and they have to send us
police officers out. That's the law. Where d'you think there'd be any mistake there?" "I don't
know this law," said K. "So much the worse for you, then," said the policeman. "It's probably
exists only in your heads," said K., he wanted, in some way, to insinuate his way into the
thoughts of the policemen, to re-shape those thoughts to his benefit or to make himself at
home there. But the policeman just said dismissively, "You'll find out when it affects you."
Franz joined in, and said, "Look at this, Willem, he admits he doesn't know the law and at the
same time insists he's innocent." "You're quite right, but we can't get him to understand a
thing," said the other. K. stopped talking with them; do I, he thought to himself, do I really
have to carry on getting tangled up with the chattering of base functionaries like this?—and
they admit themselves that they are of the lowest position. They're talking about things of
which they don't have the slightest understanding, anyway. It's only because of their stupidity
that they're able to be so sure of themselves. I just need few words with someone of the same
social standing as myself and everything will be incomparably clearer, much clearer than a
long conversation with these two can make it. He walked up and down the free space in the
room a couple of times, across the street he could see the old woman who, now, had pulled an
old man, much older than herself, up to the window and had her arms around him. K. had to
put an end to this display, "Take me to your superior," he said. "As soon as he wants to see
you. Not before," said the policeman, the one called Willem. "And now my advice to you,"
he added, "is to go into your room, stay calm, and wait and see what's to be done with you. If
you take our advice, you won't tire yourself out thinking about things to no purpose, you need
to pull yourself together as there's a lot that's going to required of you. You've not behaved
towards us the way we deserve after being so good to you, you forget that we, whatever we
are, we're still free men and you're not, and that's quite an advantage. But in spite of all that
we're still willing, if you've got the money, to go and get you some breakfast from the café
over the road."
3
Without giving any answer to this offer, K. stood still for some time. Perhaps, if he opened
the door of the next room or even the front door, the two of them would not dare to stand in
his way, perhaps that would be the simplest way to settle the whole thing, by bringing it to a
head. But maybe they would grab him, and if he were thrown down on the ground he would
lose all the advantage he, in a certain respect, had over them. So he decided on the more
certain solution, the way things would go in the natural course of events, and went back in his
room without another word either from him or from the policemen.
He threw himself down on his bed, and from the dressing table he took the nice apple that he
had put there the previous evening for his breakfast. Now it was all the breakfast he had and
anyway, as he confirmed as soon as he took his first, big bite of it, it was far better than a
breakfast he could have had through the good will of the policemen from the dirty café. He
felt well and confident, he had failed to go into work at the bank this morning but that could
easily be excused because of the relatively high position he held there. Should he really send
in his explanation? He wondered about it. If nobody believed him, and in this case that would
be understandable, he could bring Mrs. Grubach in as a witness, or even the old pair from
across the street, who probably even now were on their way over to the window opposite. It
puzzled K., at least it puzzled him looking at it from the policemen's point of view, that they
had made him go into the room and left him alone there, where he had ten different ways of
killing himself. At the same time, though, he asked himself, this time looking at it from his
own point of view, what reason he could have to do so. Because those two were sitting there
in the next room and had taken his breakfast, perhaps. It would have been so pointless to kill
himself that, even if he had wanted to, the pointlessness would have made him unable.
Maybe, if the policemen had not been so obviously limited in their mental abilities, it could
have been supposed that they had come to the same conclusion and saw no danger in leaving
him alone because of it. They could watch now, if they wanted, and see how he went over to
the cupboard in the wall where he kept a bottle of good schnapps, how he first emptied a
glass of it in place of his breakfast and how he then took a second glassful in order to give
himself courage, the last one just as a precaution for the unlikely chance it would be needed.
Then he was so startled by a shout to him from the other room that he struck his teeth against
the glass. "The supervisor wants to see you!" a voice said. It was only the shout that startled
him, this curt, abrupt, military shout, that he would not have expected from the policeman
called Franz. In itself, he found the order very welcome. "At last!" he called back, locked the
cupboard and, without delay, hurried into the next room. The two policemen were standing
there and chased him back into his bedroom as if that were a matter of course. "What d'you
think you're doing?" they cried. "Think you're going to see the supervisor dressed in just your
shirt, do you? He'd see to it you got a right thumping, and us and all!" "Let go of me for
God's sake!" called K., who had already been pushed back as far as his wardrobe, "if you
accost me when I'm still in bed you can't expect to find me in my evening dress." "That won't
help you," said the policemen, who always became very quiet, almost sad, when K. began to
shout, and in that way confused him or, to some extent, brought him to his senses.
"Ridiculous formalities!" he grumbled, as he lifted his coat from the chair and kept it in both
his hands for a little while, as if holding it out for the policemen's inspection. They shook
their heads. "It's got to be a black coat," they said. At that, K. threw the coat to the floor and
said—without knowing even himself what he meant by it—"Well it's not going to be the
main trial, after all." The policemen laughed, but continued to insist, "It's got to be a black
coat." "Well that's alright by me if it makes things go any faster," said K. He opened the
wardrobe himself, spent a long time searching through all the clothes, and chose his best
black suit which had a short jacket that had greatly surprised those who knew him, then he
also pulled out a fresh shirt and began, carefully, to get dressed. He secretly told himself that
4
he had succeeded in speeding things up by letting the policemen forget to make him have a
bath. He watched them to see if they might remember after all, but of course it never occurred
to them, although Willem did not forget to send Franz up to the supervisor with the message
saying that K. was getting dressed.
Once he was properly dressed, K. had to pass by Willem as he went through the next room
into the one beyond, the door of which was already wide open. K. knew very well that this
room had recently been let to a typist called 'Miss Bürstner'. She was in the habit of going out
to work very early and coming back home very late, and K. had never exchanged more than a
few words of greeting with her. Now, her bedside table had been pulled into the middle of the
room to be used as a desk for these proceedings, and the supervisor sat behind it. He had his
legs crossed, and had thrown one arm over the backrest of the chair.
In one corner of the room there were three young people looking at the photographs
belonging to Miss Bürstner that had been put into a piece of fabric on the wall. Hung up on
the handle of the open window was a white blouse. At the window across the street, there was
the old pair again, although now their number had increased, as behind them, and far taller
than they were, stood a man with an open shirt that showed his chest and a reddish goatee
beard which he squeezed and twisted with his fingers. "Josef K.?" asked the supervisor,
perhaps merely to attract K.'s attention as he looked round the room. K. nodded. "I daresay
you were quite surprised by all that's been taking place this morning," said the supervisor as,
with both hands, he pushed away the few items on the bedside table—the candle and box of
matches, a book and a pin cushion which lay there as if they were things he would need for
his own business. "Certainly," said K., and he began to feel relaxed now that, at last, he stood
in front of someone with some sense, someone with whom he would be able to talk about his
situation. "Certainly I'm surprised, but I'm not in any way very surprised." "You're not very
surprised?" asked the supervisor, as he positioned the candle in the middle of the table and
the other things in a group around it. "Perhaps you don't quite understand me," K. hurriedly
pointed out. "What I mean is ..." here K. broke off what he was saying and looked round for
somewhere to sit. "I may sit down, mayn't I?" he asked. "That's not usual," the supervisor
answered. "What I mean is ...," said K. without delaying a second time, "that, yes, I am very
surprised but when you've been in the world for thirty years already and had to make your
own way through everything yourself, which has been my lot, then you become hardened to
surprises and don't take them too hard. Especially not what's happened today." "Why
especially not what's happened today?" "I wouldn't want to say that I see all of this as a joke,
you seem to have gone to too much trouble making all these arrangements for that. Everyone
in the house must be taking part in it as well as all of you, that would be going beyond what
could be a joke. So I don't want to say that this is a joke." "Quite right," said the supervisor,
looking to see how many matches were left in the box. "But on the other hand," K. went on,
looking round at everyone there and even wishing he could get the attention of the three who
were looking at the photographs, "on the other hand this really can't be all that important.
That follows from the fact that I've been indicted, but can't think of the slightest offence for
which I could be indicted. But even that is all beside the point, the main question is: Who is
issuing the indictment? What office is conducting this affair? Are you officials? None of you
is wearing a uniform, unless what you are wearing"—here he turned towards Franz—"is
meant to be a uniform, it's actually more of a travelling suit. I require a clear answer to all
these questions, and I'm quite sure that once things have been made clear we can take our
leave of each other on the best of terms." The supervisor slammed the box of matches down
on the table. "You're making a big mistake," he said. "These gentlemen and I have got
nothing to do with your business, in fact we know almost nothing about you. We could be
wearing uniforms as proper and exact as you like and your situation wouldn't be any the
5
worse for it. As to whether you're on a charge, I can't give you any sort of clear answer to
that, I don't even know whether you are or not. You're under arrest, you're quite right about
that, but I don't know any more than that. Maybe these officers have been chit-chatting with
you, well if they have that's all it is, chit-chat. I can't give you an answer to your questions,
but I can give you a bit of advice: You'd better think less about us and what's going to happen
to you, and think a bit more about yourself. And stop making all this fuss about your sense of
innocence; you don't make such a bad impression, but with all this fuss you're damaging it.
And you ought to do a bit less talking, too. Almost everything you've said so far has been
things we could have taken from your behaviour, even if you'd said no more than a few
words. And what you have said has not exactly been in your favour."
K. stared at the supervisor. Was this man, probably younger than he was, lecturing him like a
schoolmaster. Was he being punished for his honesty with a telling off. And was he to learn
nothing about the reasons for his arrest or those who were arresting him. He became
somewhat cross and began to walk up and down. No-one stopped him doing this and he
pushed his sleeves back, felt his chest, straightened his hair, went over to the three men, said,
"It makes no sense," at which these three turned round to face him and came towards him
with serious expressions. He finally came again to a halt in front of the supervisor's desk.
"State Attorney Hasterer is a good friend of mine," he said, "can I telephone him?"
"Certainly," said the supervisor, "but I don't know what the point of that will be, I suppose
you must have some private matter you want to discuss with him." "What the point is?"
shouted K., more disconcerted that cross. "Who do you think you are? You want to see some
point in it while you're carrying out something as pointless as it could be. It's enough to make
you cry! These gentlemen first accost me, and now they sit or stand about in here and let me
be hauled up in front of you. What point there would be, in telephoning a state attorney when
I'm ostensibly under arrest? Very well, I won't make the telephone call." "You can call him if
you want to," said the supervisor, stretching his hand out towards the outer room where the
telephone was, "please, go on, do make your phone call." "No, I don't want to any more," said
K., and went over to the window. Across the street, the people were still there at the window,
and it was only now that K. had gone up to his window that they seemed to become uneasy
about quietly watching what was going on. The old couple wanted to get up but the man
behind them calmed them down. "We've got some kind of audience over there," called K. to
the supervisor, quite loudly, as he pointed out with his forefinger. "Go away," he then called
across to them. And the three of them did immediately retreat a few steps, the old pair even
found themselves behind the man who then concealed them with the breadth of his body and
seemed, going by the movements of his mouth, to be saying something incomprehensible into
the distance. They did not disappear entirely, though, but seemed to be waiting for the
moment when they could come back to the window without being noticed. "Intrusive,
thoughtless people!" said K. as he turned back into the room. The supervisor may have
agreed with him, at least K. thought that was what he saw from the corner of his eye. But it
was just as possible that he had not even been listening as he had his hand pressed firmly
down on the table and seemed to be comparing the length of his fingers. The two policemen
were sitting on a chest covered with a coloured blanket, rubbing their knees. The three young
people had put their hands on their hips and were looking round aimlessly. Everything was
still, like in some office that has been forgotten about. "Now, gentlemen," called out K., and
for a moment it seemed as if he was carrying all of them on his shoulders, "it looks like your
business with me is over with. In my opinion, it's best now to stop wondering about whether
you're proceeding correctly or incorrectly, and to bring the matter to a peaceful close with a
mutual handshake. If you are of the same opinion, then please...." and he walked up to the
supervisor's desk and held out his hand to him. The supervisor raised his eyes, bit his lip and
looked at K.'s outstretched hand; K. still believed the supervisor would do as he suggested.
6
But instead, he stood up, picked up a hard round hat that was laying on Miss Bürstner's bed
and put it carefully onto his head, using both hands as if trying on a new hat. "Everything
seems so simple to you, doesn't it," he said to K. as he did so, "so you think we should bring
the matter to a peaceful close, do you? No, no, that won't do. Mind you, on the other hand I
certainly wouldn't want you to think there's no hope for you. No, why should you think that?
You're simply under arrest, nothing more than that. That's what I had to tell you, that's what
I've done and now I've seen how you've taken it. That's enough for one day and we can take
our leave of each other, for the time being at least. I expect you'll want to go in to the bank
now, won't you?" "In to the bank?" asked K., "I thought I was under arrest." K. said this with
a certain amount of defiance as, although his handshake had not been accepted, he was
feeling more independent of all these people, especially since the supervisor had stood up. He
was playing with them. If they left, he had decided he would run after them and offer to let
them arrest him. That's why he even repeated, "How can I go in to the bank when I'm under
arrest?" "I see you've misunderstood me," said the supervisor who was already at the door.
"It's true that you're under arrest, but that shouldn't stop you from carrying out your job. And
there shouldn't be anything to stop you carrying on with your usual life." "In that case it's not
too bad, being under arrest," said K., and went up close to the supervisor. "I never meant it
should be anything else," he replied. "It hardly seems to have been necessary to notify me of
the arrest in that case," said K., and went even closer. The others had also come closer. All of
them had gathered together into a narrow space by the door. "That was my duty," said the
supervisor. "A silly duty," said K., unyielding. "Maybe so," replied the supervisor, "only don't
let's waste our time talking on like this. I had assumed you'd be wanting to go to the bank. As
you're paying close attention to every word I'll add this: I'm not forcing you to go to the bank,
I'd just assumed you wanted to. And to make things easier for you, and to let you get to the
bank with as little fuss as possible I've put these three gentlemen, colleagues of yours, at your
disposal." "What's that?" exclaimed K., and looked at the three in astonishment. He could
only remember seeing them in their group by the photographs, but these characterless,
anaemic young people were indeed officials from his bank, not colleagues of his, that was
putting it too high and it showed a gap in the omniscience of the supervisor, but they were
nonetheless junior members of staff at the bank. How could K. have failed to see that? How
occupied he must have been with the supervisor and the policemen not to have recognised
these three! Rabensteiner, with his stiff demeanour and swinging hands, Kullich, with his
blonde hair and deep-set eyes, and Kaminer, with his involuntary grin caused by chronic
muscle spasms. "Good morning," said K. after a while, extending his hand to the gentlemen
as they bowed correctly to him. "I didn't recognise you at all. So, we'll go into work now,
shall we?" The gentlemen laughed and nodded enthusiastically, as if that was what they had
been waiting for all the time, except that K. had left his hat in his room so they all dashed,
one after another, into the room to fetch it, which caused a certain amount of embarrassment.
K. stood where he was and watched them through the open double doorway, the last to go, of
course, was the apathetic Rabensteiner who had broken into no more than an elegant trot.
Kaminer got to the hat and K., as he often had to do at the bank, forcibly reminded himself
that the grin was not deliberate, that he in fact wasn't able to grin deliberately. At that
moment Mrs. Grubach opened the door from the hallway into the living room where all the
people were. She did not seem to feel guilty about anything at all, and K., as often before,
looked down at the belt of her apron which, for no reason, cut so deeply into her hefty body.
Once downstairs, K., with his watch in his hand, decided to take a taxi—he had already been
delayed by half an hour and there was no need to make the delay any longer. Kaminer ran to
the corner to summon it, and the two others were making obvious efforts to keep K. diverted
when Kullich pointed to the doorway of the house on the other side of the street where the
large man with the blonde goatee beard appeared and, a little embarrassed at first at letting
7
himself be seen in his full height, stepped back to the wall and leant against it. The old couple
were probably still on the stairs. K. was cross with Kullich for pointing out this man whom he
had already seen himself, in fact whom he had been expecting. "Don't look at him!" he
snapped, without noticing how odd it was to speak to free men in this way. But there was no
explanation needed anyway as just then the taxi arrived, they sat inside and set off. Inside the
taxi, K. remembered that he had not noticed the supervisor and the policemen leaving—the
supervisor had stopped him noticing the three bank staff and now the three bank staff had
stopped him noticing the supervisor. This showed that K. was not very attentive, and he
resolved to watch himself more carefully in this respect. Nonetheless, he gave it no thought
as he twisted himself round and leant over onto the rear shelf of the car to catch sight of the
supervisor and the policemen if he could. But he turned back round straight away and leant
comfortably into the corner of the taxi without even having made the effort to see anyone.
Although it did not seem like it, now was just the time when he needed some encouragement,
but the gentlemen seemed tired just then, Rabensteiner looked out of the car to the right,
Kullich to the left and only Kaminer was there with his grin at K.'s service. It would have
been inhumane to make fun of that.
That spring, whenever possible, K. usually spent his evenings after work—he usually stayed
in the office until nine o'clock—with a short walk, either by himself or in the company of
some of the bank officials, and then he would go into a pub where he would sit at the
regulars' table with mostly older men until eleven. There were, however, also exceptions to
this habit, times, for instance, when K. was invited by the bank's manager (whom he greatly
respected for his industry and trustworthiness) to go with him for a ride in his car or to eat
dinner with him at his large house. K. would also go, once a week, to see a girl called Elsa
who worked as a waitress in a wine bar through the night until late in the morning. During the
daytime she only received visitors while still in bed.
That evening, though,—the day had passed quickly with a lot of hard work and many
respectful and friendly birthday greetings—K. wanted to go straight home. Each time he had
any small break from the day's work he considered, without knowing exactly what he had in
mind, that Mrs. Grubach's flat seemed to have been put into great disarray by the events of
that morning, and that it was up to him to put it back into order. Once order had been
restored, every trace of those events would have been erased and everything would take its
previous course once more. In particular, there was nothing to fear from the three bank
officials, they had immersed themselves back into their paperwork and there was no
alteration to be seen in them. K. had called each of them, separately or all together, into his
office that day for no other reason than to observe them; he was always satisfied and had
always been able to let them go again.
At half past nine that evening, when he arrived back in front of the building where he lived,
he met a young lad in the doorway who was standing there, his legs apart and smoking a pipe.
"Who are you?" immediately asked K., bringing his face close to the lad's, as it was hard to
see in the half light of the landing. "I'm the landlord's son, sir," answered the lad, taking the
pipe from his mouth and stepping to one side. "The landlord's son?" asked K., and
impatiently knocked on the ground with his stick. "Did you want anything, sir? Would you
like me to fetch my father?" "No, no," said K., there was something forgiving in his voice, as
if the boy had harmed him in some way and he was excusing him. "It's alright," he said then,
and went on, but before going up the stairs he turned round once more.
He could have gone directly to his room, but as he wanted to speak with Mrs. Grubach he
went straight to her door and knocked. She was sat at the table with a knitted stocking and a
pile of old stockings in front of her. K. apologised, a little embarrassed at coming so late, but
8
Mrs. Grubach was very friendly and did not want to hear any apology, she was always ready
to speak to him, he knew very well that he was her best and her favourite tenant. K. looked
round the room, it looked exactly as it usually did, the breakfast dishes, which had been on
the table by the window that morning, had already been cleared away. "A woman's hands will
do many things when no-one's looking," he thought, he might himself have smashed all the
dishes on the spot but certainly would not have been able to carry it all out. He looked at Mrs.
Grubach with some gratitude. "Why are you working so late?" he asked. They were now both
sitting at the table, and K. now and then sank his hands into the pile of stockings. "There's a
lot of work to do," she said, "during the day I belong to the tenants; if I'm to sort out my own
things there are only the evenings left to me." "I fear I may have caused you some
exceptional work today." "How do you mean, Mr. K.?" she asked, becoming more interested
and leaving her work in her lap. "I mean the men who were here this morning." "Oh, I see,"
she said, and went peacefully back to what she was doing, "that was no trouble, not
especially." K. looked on in silence as she took up the knitted stocking once more. She seems
surprised at my mentioning it, he thought, she seems to think it's improper for me to mention
it. All the more important for me to do so. An old woman is the only person I can speak about
it with. "But it must have caused some work for you," he said then, "but it won't happen
again." "No, it can't happen again," she agreed, and smiled at K. in a way that was almost
pained. "Do you mean that seriously?" asked K. "Yes," she said, more gently, "but the
important thing is you mustn't take it too hard. There are so many awful things happening in
the world! As you're being so honest with me, Mr. K., I can admit to you that I listened to a
little of what was going on from behind the door, and that those two policemen told me one
or two things as well. It's all to do with your happiness, and that's something that's quite close
to my heart, perhaps more than it should be as I am, after all, only your landlady. Anyway, so
I heard one or two things but I can't really say that it's about anything very serious. No. You
have been arrested, but it's not in the same way as when they arrest a thief. If you're arrested
in the same way as a thief, then it's bad, but an arrest like this.... It seems to me that it's
something very complicated—forgive me if I'm saying something stupid—something very
complicated that I don't understand, but something that you don't really need to understand
anyway."
"There's nothing stupid about what you've said, Mrs. Grubach, or at least I partly agree with
you, only, the way I judge the whole thing is harsher than yours, and think it's not only not
something complicated but simply a fuss about nothing. I was just caught unawares, that's
what happened. If I had got up as soon as I was awake without letting myself get confused
because Anna wasn't there, if I'd got up and paid no regard to anyone who might have been in
my way and come straight to you, if I'd done something like having my breakfast in the
kitchen as an exception, asked you to bring my clothes from my room, in short, if I had
behaved sensibly then nothing more would have happened, everything that was waiting to
happen would have been stifled. People are so often unprepared. In the bank, for example, I
am well prepared, nothing of this sort could possibly happen to me there, I have my own
assistant there, there are telephones for internal and external calls in front of me on the desk, I
continually receive visits from people, representatives, officials, but besides that, and most
importantly, I'm always occupied with my work, that's to say I'm always alert, it would even
be a pleasure for me to find myself faced with something of that sort. But now it's over with,
and I didn't really even want to talk about it any more, only I wanted to hear what you, as a
sensible woman, thought about it all, and I'm very glad to hear that we're in agreement. But
now you must give me your hand, an agreement of this sort needs to be confirmed with a
handshake."
9
Will she shake hands with me? The supervisor didn't shake hands, he thought, and looked at
the woman differently from before, examining her. She stood up, as he had also stood up, and
was a little self-conscious, she hadn't been able to understand everything that K. said. As a
result of this self-consciousness she said something that she certainly did not intend and
certainly was not appropriate. "Don't take it so hard, Mr. K.," she said, with tears in her voice
and also, of course, forgetting the handshake. "I didn't know I was taking it hard," said K.,
feeling suddenly tired and seeing that if this woman did agree with him it was of very little
value.
Before going out the door he asked, "Is Miss Bürstner home?" "No," said Mrs. Grubach,
smiling as she gave this simple piece of information, saying something sensible at last. "She's
at the theatre. Did you want to see her? Should I give her a message?" "I, er, I just wanted to
have a few words with her." "I'm afraid I don't know when she's coming in; she usually gets
back late when she's been to the theatre." "It really doesn't matter," said K. his head hanging
as he turned to the door to leave, "I just wanted to give her my apology for taking over her
room today." "There's no need for that, Mr. K., you're too conscientious, the young lady
doesn't know anything about it, she hasn't been home since early this morning and
everything's been tidied up again, you can see for yourself." And she opened the door to Miss
Bürstner's room. "Thank you, I'll take your word for it," said K., but went nonetheless over to
the open door. The moon shone quietly into the unlit room. As far as could be seen,
everything was indeed in its place, not even the blouse was hanging on the window handle.
The pillows on the bed looked remarkably plump as they lay half in the moonlight. "Miss
Bürstner often comes home late," said K., looking at Mrs. Grubach as if that were her
responsibility. "That's how young people are!" said Mrs. Grubach to excuse herself. "Of
course, of course," said K., "but it can be taken too far." "Yes, it can be," said Mrs. Grubach,
"you're so right, Mr. K. Perhaps it is in this case. I certainly wouldn't want to say anything
nasty about Miss Bürstner, she is a good, sweet girl, friendly, tidy, punctual, works hard, I
appreciate all that very much, but one thing is true, she ought to have more pride, be a bit less
forthcoming. Twice this month already, in the street over the way, I've seen her with a
different gentleman. I really don't like saying this, you're the only one I've said this to, Mr.
K., I swear to God, but I'm going to have no choice but to have a few words with Miss
Bürstner about it myself. And it's not the only thing about her that I'm worried about." "Mrs.
Grubach, you are on quite the wrong track," said K., so angry that he was hardly able to hide
it, "and you have moreover misunderstood what I was saying about Miss Bürstner, that is not
what I meant. In fact I warn you quite directly not to say anything to her, you are quite
mistaken, I know Miss Bürstner very well and there is no truth at all in what you say. And
what's more, perhaps I'm going to far, I don't want to get in your way, say to her whatever
you see fit. Good night." "Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach as if asking him for something and
hurrying to his door which he had already opened, "I don't want to speak to Miss Bürstner at
all, not yet, of course I'll continue to keep an eye on her but you're the only one I've told what
I know. And it is, after all something that everyone who lets rooms has to do if she's to keep
the house decent, that's all I'm trying to do." "Decent!" called out K. through the crack in the
door, "if you want to keep the house decent you'll first have to give me notice." Then he
slammed the door shut, there was a gentle knocking to which he paid no more attention.
He did not feel at all like going to bed, so he decided to stay up, and this would also give him
the chance to find out when Miss Bürstner would arrive home. Perhaps it would also still be
possible, even if a little inappropriate, to have a few words with her. As he lay there by the
window, pressing his hands to his tired eyes, he even thought for a moment that he might
punish Mrs. Grubach by persuading Miss Bürstner to give in her notice at the same time as he
would. But he immediately realised that that would be shockingly excessive, and there would
10
even be the suspicion that he was moving house because of the incidents of that morning.
Nothing would have been more nonsensical and, above all, more pointless and contemptible.
When he had become tired of looking out onto the empty street he slightly opened the door to
the living room so that he could see anyone who entered the flat from where he was and lay
down on the couch. He lay there, quietly smoking a cigar, until about eleven o'clock. He
wasn't able to hold out longer than that, and went a little way into the hallway as if in that
way he could make Miss Bürstner arrive sooner. He had no particular desire for her, he could
not even remember what she looked like, but now he wanted to speak to her and it irritated
him that her late arrival home meant this day would be full of unease and disorder right to its
very end. It was also her fault that he had not had any dinner that evening and that he had
been unable to visit Elsa as he had intended. He could still make up for both of those things,
though, if he went to the wine bar where Elsa worked. He wanted to do so even later, after the
discussion with Miss Bürstner.
It was already gone half past eleven when someone could be heard in the stairway. K., who
had been lost in his thoughts in the hallway, walking up and down loudly as if it were his own
room, fled behind his door. Miss Bürstner had arrived. Shivering, she pulled a silk shawl over
her slender shoulders as she locked the door. The next moment she would certainly go into
her room, where K. ought not to intrude in the middle of the night; that meant he would have
to speak to her now, but, unfortunately, he had not put the electric light on in his room so that
when he stepped out of the dark it would give the impression of being an attack and would
certainly, at the very least, have been quite alarming. There was no time to lose, and in his
helplessness he whispered through the crack of the door, "Miss Bürstner." It sounded like he
was pleading with her, not calling to her. "Is there someone there?" asked Miss Bürstner,
looking round with her eyes wide open. "It's me," said K. and came out. "Oh, Mr. K.!" said
Miss Bürstner with a smile. "Good Evening," and offered him her hand. "I wanted to have a
word with you, if you would allow me?" "Now?" asked Miss Bürstner, "does it have to be
now? It is a little odd, isn't it?" "I've been waiting for you since nine o'clock." "Well, I was at
the theatre, I didn't know anything about you waiting for me." "The reason I need to speak to
you only came up today." "I see, well I don't see why not, I suppose, apart from being so tired
I could drop. Come into my room for a few minutes then. We certainly can't talk out here,
we'd wake everyone up and I think that would be more unpleasant for us than for them. Wait
here till I've put the light on in my room, and then turn the light down out here." K. did as he
was told, and then even waited until Miss Bürstner came out of her room and quietly invited
him, once more, to come in. "Sit down," she said, indicating the ottoman, while she herself
remained standing by the bedpost despite the tiredness she had spoken of; she did not even
take off her hat, which was small but decorated with an abundance of flowers. "What is it you
wanted, then? I'm really quite curious." She gently crossed her legs. "I expect you'll say," K.
began, "that the matter really isn't all that urgent and we don't need to talk about it right now,
but...." "I never listen to introductions," said Miss Bürstner. "That makes my job so much
easier," said K. "This morning, to some extent through my fault, your room was made a little
untidy, this happened because of people I did not know and against my will but, as I said,
because of my fault; I wanted to apologise for it." "My room?" asked Miss Bürstner, and
instead of looking round the room scrutinised K. "It is true," said K., and now, for the first
time, they looked each other in the eyes, "there's no point in saying exactly how this came
about." "But that's the interesting thing about it," said Miss Bürstner. "No," said K. "Well
then," said Miss Bürstner, "I don't want to force my way into any secrets, if you insist that it's
of no interest I won't insist. I'm quite happy to forgive you for it, as you ask, especially as I
can't see anything at all that's been left untidy." With her hand laid flat on her lower hip, she
made a tour around the room. At the mat where the photographs were she stopped. "Look at
11
this!" she cried. "My photographs really have been put in the wrong places. Oh, that's
horrible. Someone really has been in my room without permission." K. nodded, and quietly
cursed Kaminer who worked at his bank and who was always active doing things that had
neither use nor purpose. "It is odd," said Miss Bürstner, "that I'm forced to forbid you to do
something that you ought to have forbidden yourself to do, namely to come into my room
when I'm not here." "But I did explain to you," said K., and went over to join her by the
photographs, "that it wasn't me who interfered with your photographs; but as you don't
believe me I'll have to admit that the investigating committee brought along three bank
employees with them, one of them must have touched your photographs and as soon as I get
the chance I'll ask to have him dismissed from the bank. Yes, there was an investigating
committee here," added K., as the young lady was looking at him enquiringly. "Because of
you?" she asked. "Yes," answered K. "No!" the lady cried with a laugh. "Yes, they were,"
said K., "you believe that I'm innocent then, do you?" "Well now, innocent ..." said the lady,
"I don't want to start making any pronouncements that might have serious consequences, I
don't really know you after all, it means they're dealing with a serious criminal if they send an
investigating committee straight out to get him. But you're not in custody now—at least I take
it you've not escaped from prison considering that you seem quite calm—so you can't have
committed any crime of that sort." "Yes," said K., "but it might be that the investigating
committee could see that I'm innocent, or not so guilty as had been supposed." "Yes, that's
certainly a possibility," said Miss Bürstner, who seemed very interested. "Listen," said K.,
"you don't have much experience in legal matters." "No, that's true, I don't," said Miss
Bürstner, "and I've often regretted it, as I'd like to know everything and I'm very interested in
legal matters. There's something peculiarly attractive about the law, isn't there. But I'll
certainly be perfecting my knowledge in this area, as next month I start work in a legal
office." "That's very good," said K., "that means you'll be able to give me some help with my
trial." "That could well be," said Miss Bürstner, "why not? I like to make use of what I
know." "I mean it quite seriously," said K., "or at least, half seriously, as you do. This affair is
too petty to call in a lawyer, but I could make good use of someone who could give me
advice." "Yes, but if I'm to give you advice I'll have to know what it's all about," said Miss
Bürstner. "That's exactly the problem," said K., "I don't know that myself." "So you have
been making fun of me, then," said Miss Bürstner exceedingly disappointed, "you really
ought not to try something like that on at this time of night." And she stepped away from the
photographs where they had stood so long together. "Miss Bürstner, no," said K., "I'm not
making fun of you. Please believe me! I've already told you everything I know. More than I
know, in fact, as it actually wasn't even an investigating committee, that's just what I called
them because I don't know what else to call them. There was no cross questioning at all, I
was merely arrested, but by a committee." Miss Bürstner sat on the ottoman and laughed
again. "What was it like then?" she asked. "It was terrible," said K., although his mind was no
longer on the subject, he had become totally absorbed by Miss Bürstner's gaze who was
supporting her chin on one hand—the elbow rested on the cushion of the ottoman—and
slowly stroking her hip with the other. "That's too vague," said Miss Bürstner. "What's too
vague?" asked K. Then he remembered himself and asked, "Would you like me to show you
what it was like?" He wanted to move in some way but did not want to leave. "I'm already
tired," said Miss Bürstner. "You arrived back so late," said K. "Now you've started telling me
off. Well I suppose I deserve it as I shouldn't have let you in here in the first place, and it
turns out there wasn't even any point." "Oh, there was a point, you'll see now how important a
point it was," said K. "May I move this table away from your bedside and put it here?" "What
do you think you're doing?" said Miss Bürstner. "Of course you can't!" "In that case I can't
show you," said K., quite upset, as if Miss Bürstner had committed some incomprehensible
offence against him. "Alright then, if you need it to show what you mean, just take the
12
bedside table then," said Miss Bürstner, and after a short pause added in a weak voice, "I'm so
tired I'm allowing more than I ought to." K. put the little table in the middle of the room and
sat down behind it. "You have to get a proper idea of where the people were situated, it is
very interesting. I'm the supervisor, sitting over there on the chest are two policemen,
standing next to the photographs there are three young people. Hanging on the handle of the
window is a white blouse—I just mention that by the way. And now it begins. Ah yes, I'm
forgetting myself, the most important person of all, so I'm standing here in front of the table.
The supervisor is sitting extremely comfortably with his legs crossed and his arm hanging
over the backrest here like some layabout. And now it really does begin. The supervisor calls
out as if he had to wake me up, in fact he shouts at me, I'm afraid, if I'm to make it clear to
you, I'll have to shout as well, and it's nothing more than my name that he shouts out." Miss
Bürstner, laughing as she listened to him, laid her forefinger on her mouth so that K. would
not shout, but it was too late. K. was too engrossed in his role and slowly called out, "Josef
K.!" It was not as loud as he had threatened, but nonetheless, once he had suddenly called it
out, the cry seemed gradually to spread itself all round the room.
There was a series of loud, curt and regular knocks at the door of the adjoining room. Miss
Bürstner went pale and laid her hand on her heart. K. was especially startled, as for a moment
he had been quite unable to think of anything other than the events of that morning and the
girl for whom he was performing them. He had hardly pulled himself together when he
jumped over to Miss Bürstner and took her hand. "Don't be afraid," he whispered, "I'll put
everything right. But who can it be? It's only the living room next door, nobody sleeps in
there." "Yes they do," whispered Miss Bürstner into K.'s ear, "a nephew of Mrs. Grubach's, a
captain in the army, has been sleeping there since yesterday. There's no other room free. I'd
forgotten about it too. Why did you have to shout like that? You've made me quite upset."
"There is no reason for it," said K., and, now as she sank back onto the cushion, kissed her
forehead. "Go away, go away," she said, hurriedly sitting back up, "get out of here, go, what
is it you want, he's listening at the door, he can hear everything. You're causing me so much
trouble!" "I won't go," said K., "until you've calmed down a bit. Come over into the other
corner of the room, he won't be able to hear us there." She let him lead her there. "Don't
forget," he said, "although this might be unpleasant for you you're not in any real danger. You
know how much esteem Mrs. Grubach has for me, she's the one who will make all the
decisions in this, especially as the captain is her nephew, but she believes everything I say
without question. What's more, she has borrowed a large sum of money from me and that
makes her dependent on me. I will confirm whatever you say to explain our being here
together, however inappropriate it might be, and I guarantee to make sure that Mrs. Grubach
will not only say she believes the explanation in public but will believe it truly and sincerely.
You will have no need to consider me in any way. If you wish to let it be known that I have
attacked you then Mrs. Grubach will be informed of such and she will believe it without even
losing her trust in me, that's how much respect she has for me." Miss Bürstner looked at the
floor in front of her, quiet and a little sunk in on herself. "Why would Mrs. Grubach not
believe that I've attacked you?" added K. He looked at her hair in front of him, parted,
bunched down, reddish and firmly held in place. He thought she would look up at him, but
without changing her manner she said, "Forgive me, but it was the suddenness of the
knocking that startled me so much, not so much what the consequences of the captain being
here might be. It was all so quiet after you'd shouted, and then there was the knocking, that's
what made me so shocked, and I was sitting right by the door, the knocking was right next to
me. Thank you for your suggestions, but I won't accept them. I can bear the responsibility for
anything that happens in my room myself, and I can do so with anyone. I'm surprised you
don't realise just how insulting your suggestions are and what they imply about me, although
I certainly acknowledge your good intentions. But now, please go, leave me alone, I need you
13
to go now even more than I did earlier. The couple of minutes you asked for have grown into
half an hour, more than half an hour now." K. took hold of her hand, and then of her wrist,
"You're not cross with me, though?" he said. She pulled her hand away and answered, "No,
no, I'm never cross with anyone." He grasped her wrist once more, she tolerated it now and,
in that way, led him to the door. He had fully intended to leave. But when he reached the door
he came to a halt as if he hadn't expected to find a door there, Miss Bürstner made use of that
moment to get herself free, open the door, slip out into the hallway and gently say to K. from
there, "Now, come along, please. Look," she pointed to the captain's door, from under which
there was a light shining, "he's put a light on and he's laughing at us." "Alright, I'm coming,"
said K., moved forward, took hold of her, kissed her on the mouth and then over her whole
face like a thirsty animal lapping with its tongue when it eventually finds water. He finally
kissed her on her neck and her throat and left his lips pressed there for a long time. He did not
look up until there was a noise from the captain's room. "I'll go now," he said, he wanted to
address Miss Bürstner by her Christian name, but did not know it. She gave him a tired nod,
offered him her hand to kiss as she turned away as if she did not know what she was doing,
and went back into her room with her head bowed. A short while later, K. was lying in his
bed. He very soon went to sleep, but before he did he thought a little while about his
behaviour, he was satisfied with it but felt some surprise that he was not more satisfied; he
was seriously worried about Miss Bürstner because of the captain.
14
Chapter II
First Cross-examination
K. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearing concerning his case the
following Sunday. He was made aware that these cross examinations would follow one
another regularly, perhaps not every week but quite frequently. On the one hand it was in
everyone's interest to bring proceedings quickly to their conclusion, but on the other hand
every aspect of the examinations had to be carried out thoroughly without lasting too long
because of the associated stress. For these reasons, it had been decided to hold a series of
brief examinations following on one after another. Sunday had been chosen as the day for the
hearings so that K. would not be disturbed in his professional work. It was assumed that he
would be in agreement with this, but if he wished for another date then, as far as possible, he
would be accommodated. Cross-examinations could even be held in the night, for instance,
but K. would probably not be fresh enough at that time. Anyway, as long as K. made no
objection, the hearing would be left on Sundays. It was a matter of course that he would have
to appear without fail, there was probably no need to point this out to him. He would be given
the number of the building where he was to present himself, which was in a street in a suburb
well away from the city centre which K. had never been to before.
Once he had received this notice, K. hung up the receiver without giving an answer; he had
decided immediately to go there that Sunday, it was certainly necessary, proceedings had
begun and he had to face up to it, and this first examination would probably also be the last.
He was still standing in thought by the telephone when he heard the voice of the deputy
director behind him—he wanted to use the telephone but K. stood in his way. "Bad news?"
asked the deputy director casually, not in order to find anything out but just to get K. away
from the device. "No, no," said K., he stepped to one side but did not go away entirely. The
deputy director picked up the receiver and, as he waited for his connection, turned away from
it and said to K., "One question, Mr. K.: Would you like to give me the pleasure of joining
me on my sailing boat on Sunday morning? There's quite a few people coming, you're bound
to know some of them. One of them is Hasterer, the state attorney. Would you like to come
along? Do come along!" K. tried to pay attention to what the deputy director was saying. It
was of no small importance for him, as this invitation from the deputy director, with whom he
had never got on very well, meant that he was trying to improve his relations with him. It
showed how important K. had become in the bank and how its second most important official
seemed to value his friendship, or at least his impartiality. He was only speaking at the side of
the telephone receiver while he waited for his connection, but in giving this invitation the
deputy director was humbling himself. But K. would have to humiliate him a second time as
a result, he said, "Thank you very much, but I'm afraid I will have no time on Sunday, I have
a previous obligation." "Pity," said the deputy director, and turned to the telephone
conversation that had just been connected. It was not a short conversation, but K. remained
standing confused by the instrument all the time it was going on. It was only when the deputy
director hung up that he was shocked into awareness and said, in order to partially excuse his
standing there for no reason, "I've just received a telephone call, there's somewhere I need to
go, but they forgot to tell me what time." "Ask them then," said the deputy director. "It's not
that important," said K., although in that way his earlier excuse, already weak enough, was
made even weaker. As he went, the deputy director continued to speak about other things. K.
forced himself to answer, but his thoughts were mainly about that Sunday, how it would be
15
best to get there for nine o'clock in the morning as that was the time that courts always start
work on weekdays.
The weather was dull on Sunday. K. was very tired, as he had stayed out drinking until late in
the night celebrating with some of the regulars, and he had almost overslept. He dressed
hurriedly, without the time to think and assemble the various plans he had worked out during
the week. With no breakfast, he rushed to the suburb he had been told about. Oddly enough,
although he had little time to look around him, he came across the three bank officials
involved in his case, Rabensteiner, Kullich and Kaminer. The first two were travelling in a
tram that went across K.'s route, but Kaminer sat on the terrace of a café and leant curiously
over the wall as K. came over. All of them seemed to be looking at him, surprised at seeing
their superior running; it was a kind of pride that made K. want to go on foot, this was his
affair and the idea of any help from strangers, however slight, was repulsive to him, he also
wanted to avoid asking for anyone's help because that would initiate them into the affair even
if only slightly. And after all, he had no wish at all to humiliate himself before the committee
by being too punctual. Anyway, now he was running so that he would get there by nine
o'clock if at all possible, even though he had no appointment for this time.
He had thought that he would recognise the building from a distance by some kind of sign,
without knowing exactly what the sign would look like, or from some particular kind of
activity outside the entrance. K. had been told that the building was in Juliusstrasse, but when
he stood at the street's entrance it consisted on each side of almost nothing but monotonous,
grey constructions, tall blocks of flats occupied by poor people. Now, on a Sunday morning,
most of the windows were occupied, men in their shirtsleeves leant out smoking, or carefully
and gently held small children on the sills. Other windows were piled up with bedding, above
which the dishevelled head of a woman would briefly appear. People called out to each other
across the street, one of the calls provoked a loud laugh about K. himself. It was a long street,
and spaced evenly along it were small shops below street level, selling various kinds of
foodstuffs, which you reached by going down a few steps. Women went in and out of them or
stood chatting on the steps. A fruitmonger, taking his goods up to the windows, was just as
inattentive as K. and nearly knocked him down with his cart. Just then, a gramophone, which
in better parts of town would have been seen as worn out, began to play some murderous
tune.
K. went further into the street, slowly, as if he had plenty of time now, or as if the examining
magistrate were looking at him from one of the windows and therefore knew that K. had
found his way there. It was shortly after nine. The building was quite far down the street, it
covered so much area it was almost extraordinary, and the gateway in particular was tall and
long. It was clearly intended for delivery wagons belonging to the various warehouses all
round the yard which were now locked up and carried the names of companies some of which
K. knew from his work at the bank. In contrast with his usual habits, he remained standing a
while at the entrance to the yard taking in all these external details. Near him, there was a
bare-footed man sitting on a crate and reading a newspaper. There were two lads swinging on
a hand cart. In front of a pump stood a weak, young girl in a bedjacket who, as the water
flowed into her can, looked at K. There was a piece of rope stretched between two windows
in a corner of the yard, with some washing hanging on it to dry. A man stood below it calling
out instructions to direct the work being done.
K. went over to the stairway to get to the room where the hearing was to take place, but then
stood still again as besides these steps he could see three other stairway entrances, and there
also seemed to be a small passageway at the end of the yard leading into a second yard. It
irritated him that he had not been given more precise directions to the room, it meant they
16
were either being especially neglectful with him or especially indifferent, and he decided to
make that clear to them very loudly and very unambiguously. In the end he decided to climb
up the stairs, his thoughts playing on something that he remembered the policeman, Willem,
saying to him; that the court is attracted by the guilt, from which it followed that the
courtroom must be on the stairway that K. selected by chance.
As he went up he disturbed a large group of children playing on the stairs who looked at him
as he stepped through their rows. "Next time I come here," he said to himself, "I must either
bring sweets with me to make them like me or a stick to hit them with." Just before he
reached the first landing he even had to wait a little while until a ball had finished its
movement, two small lads with sly faces like grown-up scoundrels held him by his trouserlegs until it had; if he were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid
of what noise they would make by shouting.
On the first floor, his search began for real. He still felt unable to ask for the investigating
committee, and so he invented a joiner called Lanz—that name occurred to him because the
captain, Mrs. Grubach's nephew, was called Lanz—so that he could ask at every flat whether
Lanz the joiner lived there and thus obtain a chance to look into the rooms. It turned out,
though, that that was mostly possible without further ado, as almost all the doors were left
open and the children ran in and out. Most of them were small, one-windowed rooms where
they also did the cooking. Many women held babies in one arm and worked at the stove with
the other. Half grown girls, who seemed to be dressed in just their pinafores worked hardest
running to and fro. In every room, the beds were still in use by people who were ill, or still
asleep, or people stretched out on them in their clothes. K. knocked at the flats where the
doors were closed and asked whether Lanz the joiner lived there. It was usually a woman
who opened the door, heard the enquiry and turned to somebody in the room who would raise
himself from the bed. "The gentleman's asking if a joiner called Lanz, lives here." "A joiner,
called Lanz?" he would ask from the bed." "That's right," K. would say, although it was clear
that the investigating committee was not to be found there, and so his task was at an end.
There were many who thought it must be very important for K. to find Lanz the joiner and
thought long about it, naming a joiner who was not called Lanz or giving a name that had
some vague similarity with Lanz, or they asked neighbours or accompanied K. to a door a
long way away where they thought someone of that sort might live in the back part of the
building or where someone would be who could advise K. better than they could themselves.
K. eventually had to give up asking if he did not want to be led all round from floor to floor
in this way. He regretted his initial plan, which had at first seemed so practical to him. As he
reached the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took his leave of a friendly, young
worker who wanted to lead him on still further and went down the stairs. But then the thought
of how much time he was wasting made him cross, he went back again and knocked at the
first door on the fifth floor. The first thing he saw in the small room was a large clock on the
wall which already showed ten o'clock. "Is there a joiner called Lanz who lives here?" he
asked. "Pardon?" said a young woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment,
washing children's underclothes in a bucket. She pointed her wet hand towards the open door
of the adjoining room.
K. thought he had stepped into a meeting. A medium sized, two windowed room was filled
with the most diverse crowd of people—nobody paid any attention to the person who had just
entered. Close under its ceiling it was surrounded by a gallery which was also fully occupied
and where the people could only stand bent down with their heads and their backs touching
the ceiling. K., who found the air too stuffy, stepped out again and said to the young woman,
who had probably misunderstood what he had said, "I asked for a joiner, someone by the
name of Lanz." "Yes," said the woman, "please go on in." K. would probably not have
17
followed her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door handle and said,
"I'll have to close the door after you, no-one else will be allowed in." "Very sensible," said
K., "but it's too full already." But then he went back in anyway. He passed through between
two men who were talking beside the door—one of them held both hands far out in front of
himself making the movements of counting out money, the other looked him closely in the
eyes—and someone took him by the hand. It was a small, red-faced youth. "Come in, come
in," he said. K. let himself be led by him, and it turned out that there was—surprisingly in a
densely packed crowd of people moving to and fro—a narrow passage which may have been
the division between two factions; this idea was reinforced by the fact that in the first few
rows to the left and the right of him there was hardly any face looking in his direction, he saw
nothing but the backs of people directing their speech and their movements only towards
members of their own side. Most of them were dressed in black, in old, long, formal frock
coats that hung down loosely around them. These clothes were the only thing that puzzled K.,
as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for a local political meeting.
At the other end of the hall where K. had been led there was a little table set at an angle on a
very low podium which was as overcrowded as everywhere else, and behind the table, near
the edge of the podium, sat a small, fat, wheezing man who was talking with someone behind
him. This second man was standing with his legs crossed and his elbows on the backrest of
the chair, provoking much laughter. From time to time he threw his arm in the air as if doing
a caricature of someone. The youth who was leading K. had some difficulty in reporting to
the man. He had already tried twice to tell him something, standing on tiptoe, but without
getting the man's attention as he sat there above him. It was only when one of the people up
on the podium drew his attention to the youth that the man turned to him and leant down to
hear what it was he quietly said. Then he pulled out his watch and quickly looked over at K.
"You should have been here one hour and five minutes ago," he said. K. was going to give
him a reply but had no time to do so, as hardly had the man spoken than a general muttering
arose all over the right hand side of the hall. "You should have been here one hour and five
minutes ago," the man now repeated, raising his voice this time, and quickly looked round the
hall beneath him. The muttering also became immediately louder and, as the man said
nothing more, died away only gradually. Now the hall was much quieter than when K. had
entered. Only the people up in the gallery had not stopped passing remarks. As far as could
be distinguished, up in the half-darkness, dust and haze, they seemed to be less well dressed
than those below. Many of them had brought pillows that they had put between their heads
and the ceiling so that they would not hurt themselves pressed against it.
K. had decided he would do more watching than talking, so he did not defend himself for
supposedly having come late, and simply said, "Well maybe I have arrived late, I'm here
now." There followed loud applause, once more from the right hand side of the hall. Easy
people to get on your side, thought K., and was bothered only by the quiet from the left hand
side which was directly behind him and from which there was applause from only a few
individuals. He wondered what he could say to get all of them to support him together or, if
that were not possible, to at least get the support of the others for a while.
"Yes," said the man, "but I'm now no longer under any obligation to hear your case"—there
was once more a muttering, but this time it was misleading as the man waved the people's
objections aside with his hand and continued—"I will, however, as an exception, continue
with it today. But you should never arrive late like this again. And now, step forward!"
Someone jumped down from the podium so that there would be a place free for K., and K.
stepped up onto it. He stood pressed closely against the table, the press of the crowd behind
him was so great that he had to press back against it if he did not want to push the judge's
desk down off the podium and perhaps the judge along with it.
18
The judge, however, paid no attention to that but sat very comfortably on his chair and, after
saying a few words to close his discussion with the man behind him, reached for a little note
book, the only item on his desk. It was like an old school exercise book and had become quite
misshapen from much thumbing. "Now then," said the judge, thumbing through the book. He
turned to K. with the tone of someone who knows his facts and said, "you are a house
painter?" "No," said K., "I am the chief clerk in a large bank." This reply was followed by
laughter among the right hand faction down in the hall, it was so hearty that K. couldn't stop
himself joining in with it. The people supported themselves with their hands on their knees
and shook as if suffering a serious attack of coughing. Even some of those in the gallery were
laughing. The judge had become quite cross but seemed to have no power over those below
him in the hall, he tried to reduce what harm had been done in the gallery and jumped up
threatening them, his eyebrows, until then hardly remarkable, pushed themselves up and
became big, black and bushy over his eyes.
The left hand side of the hall was still quiet, though, the people stood there in rows with their
faces looking towards the podium listening to what was being said there, they observed the
noise from the other side of the hall with the same quietness and even allowed some
individuals from their own ranks, here and there, to go forward into the other faction. The
people in the left faction were not only fewer in number than the right but probably were no
more important than them, although their behaviour was calmer and that made it seem like
they were. When K. now began to speak he was convinced he was doing it in the same way
as them.
"Your question, My Lord, as to whether I am a house painter—in fact even more than that,
you did not ask at all but merely imposed it on me—is symptomatic of the whole way these
proceedings against me are being carried out. Perhaps you will object that there are no
proceedings against me. You will be quite right, as there are proceedings only if I
acknowledge that there are. But, for the moment, I do acknowledge it, out of pity for
yourselves to a large extent. It's impossible not to observe all this business without feeling
pity. I don't say things are being done without due care but I would like to make it clear that it
is I who make the acknowledgement."
K. stopped speaking and looked down into the hall. He had spoken sharply, more sharply
than he had intended, but he had been quite right. It should have been rewarded with some
applause here and there but everything was quiet, they were all clearly waiting for what
would follow, perhaps the quietness was laying the ground for an outbreak of activity that
would bring this whole affair to an end. It was somewhat disturbing that just then the door at
the end of the hall opened, the young washerwoman, who seemed to have finished her work,
came in and, despite all her caution, attracted the attention of some of the people there. It was
only the judge who gave K. any direct pleasure, as he seemed to have been immediately
struck by K.'s words. Until then, he had listened to him standing, as K.'s speech had taken
him by surprise while he was directing his attention to the gallery. Now, in the pause, he sat
down very slowly, as if he did not want anyone to notice. He took out the notebook again,
probably so that he could give the impression of being calmer.
"That won't help you, sir," continued K., "even your little book will only confirm what I say."
K. was satisfied to hear nothing but his own quiet words in this room full of strangers, and he
even dared casually to pick up the examining judge's notebook and, touching it only with the
tips of his fingers as if it were something revolting, lifted it in the air, holding it just by one of
the middle pages so that the others on each side of it, closely written, blotted and yellowing,
flapped down. "Those are the official notes of the examining judge," he said, and let the
notebook fall down onto the desk. "You can read in your book as much as you like, sir, I
19
really don't have anything in this charge book to be afraid of, even though I don't have access
to it as I wouldn't want it in my hand, I can only touch it with two fingers." The judge
grabbed the notebook from where it had fallen on the desk—which could only have been a
sign of his deep humiliation, or at least that is how it must have been perceived—tried to tidy
it up a little, and held it once more in front of himself in order to read from it.
The people in the front row looked up at him, showing such tension on their faces that he
looked back down at them for some time. Every one of them was an old man, some of them
with white beards. Could they perhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole
assembly one way or the other. They had sunk into a state of motionlessness while K. gave
his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from this passivity even when the judge
was being humiliated. "What has happened to me," continued K., with less of the vigour he
had had earlier, he continually scanned the faces in the first row, and this gave his address a
somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happened to me is not just an isolated
case. If it were it would not be of much importance as it's not of much importance to me, but
it is a symptom of proceedings which are carried out against many. It's on behalf of them that
I stand here now, not for myself alone."
Without having intended it, he had raised his voice. Somewhere in the hall, someone raised
his hands and applauded him shouting, "Bravo! Why not then? Bravo! Again I say, Bravo!"
Some of the men in the first row groped around in their beards, none of them looked round to
see who was shouting. Not even K. thought him of any importance but it did raise his spirits;
he no longer thought it at all necessary that all of those in the hall should applaud him, it was
enough if the majority of them began to think about the matter and if only one of them, now
and then, was persuaded.
"I'm not trying to be a successful orator," said K. after this thought, "that's probably more
than I'm capable of anyway. I'm sure the examining judge can speak far better than I can, it is
part of his job after all. All that I want is a public discussion of a public wrong. Listen: ten
days ago I was placed under arrest, the arrest itself is something I laugh about but that's
beside the point. They came for me in the morning when I was still in bed. Maybe the order
had been given to arrest some house painter—that seems possible after what the judge has
said—someone who is as innocent as I am, but it was me they chose. There were two police
thugs occupying the next room. They could not have taken better precautions if I had been a
dangerous robber. And these policemen were unprincipled riff-raff, they talked at me till I
was sick of it, they wanted bribes, they wanted to trick me into giving them my clothes, they
wanted money, supposedly so that they could bring me my breakfast after they had blatantly
eaten my own breakfast in front of my eyes. And even that was not enough. I was led in front
of the supervisor in another room. This was the room of a lady who I have a lot of respect for,
and I was forced to look on while the supervisor and the policemen made quite a mess of this
room because of me, although not through any fault of mine. It was not easy to stay calm, but
I managed to do so and was completely calm when I asked the supervisor why it was that I
was under arrest. If he were here he would have to confirm what I say. I can see him now,
sitting on the chair belonging to that lady I mentioned—a picture of dull-witted arrogance.
What do you think he answered? What he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all;
perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest and was satisfied. In fact
he had done more than that and brought three junior employees from the bank where I work
into the lady's room; they had made themselves busy interfering with some photographs that
belonged to the lady and causing a mess. There was, of course, another reason for bringing
these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid, were expected to spread the news
of my arrest and damage my public reputation and in particular to remove me from my
position at the bank. Well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even my
20
landlady, who is quite a simple person—and I will give you here her name in full respect, her
name is Mrs. Grubach—even Mrs. Grubach was understanding enough to see that an arrest
like this has no more significance than an attack carried out on the street by some youths who
are not kept under proper control. I repeat, this whole affair has caused me nothing but
unpleasantness and temporary irritation, but could it not also have had some far worse
consequences?"
K. broke off here and looked at the judge, who said nothing. As he did so he thought he saw
the judge use a movement of his eyes to give a sign to someone in the crowd. K. smiled and
said, "And now the judge, right next to me, is giving a secret sign to someone among you.
There seems to be someone among you who is taking directions from above. I don't know
whether the sign is meant to produce booing or applause, but I'll resist trying to guess what its
meaning is too soon. It really doesn't matter to me, and I give his lordship the judge my full
and public permission to stop giving secret signs to his paid subordinate down there and give
his orders in words instead; let him just say 'Boo now!,' and then the next time 'Clap now!'"
Whether it was embarrassment or impatience, the judge rocked backwards and forwards on
his seat. The man behind him, whom he had been talking with earlier, leant forward again,
either to give him a few general words of encouragement or some specific piece of advice.
Below them in the hall the people talked to each other quietly but animatedly. The two
factions had earlier seemed to hold views strongly opposed to each other but now they began
to intermingle, a few individuals pointed up at K., others pointed at the judge. The air in the
room was fuggy and extremely oppressive, those who were standing furthest away could
hardly even be seen through it. It must have been especially troublesome for those visitors
who were in the gallery, as they were forced to quietly ask the participants in the assembly
what exactly was happening, albeit with timid glances at the judge. The replies they received
were just as quiet, and given behind the protection of a raised hand.
"I have nearly finished what I have to say," said K., and as there was no bell available he
struck the desk with his fist in a way that startled the judge and his advisor and made them
look up from each other. "None of this concerns me, and I am therefore able to make a calm
assessment of it, and, assuming that this so-called court is of any real importance, it will be
very much to your advantage to listen to what I have to say. If you want to discuss what I say,
please don't bother to write it down until later on, I don't have any time to waste and I'll soon
be leaving."
There was immediate silence, which showed how well K. was in control of the crowd. There
were no shouts among them as there had been at the start, no-one even applauded, but if they
weren't already persuaded they seemed very close to it.
K. was pleased at the tension among all the people there as they listened to him, a rustling
rose from the silence which was more invigorating than the most ecstatic applause could have
been. "There is no doubt," he said quietly, "that there is some enormous organisation
determining what is said by this court. In my case this includes my arrest and the examination
taking place here today, an organisation that employs policemen who can be bribed, oafish
supervisors and judges of whom nothing better can be said than that they are not as arrogant
as some others. This organisation even maintains a high-level judiciary along with its train of
countless servants, scribes, policemen and all the other assistance that it needs, perhaps even
executioners and torturers—I'm not afraid of using those words. And what, gentlemen, is the
purpose of this enormous organisation. Its purpose is to arrest innocent people and wage
pointless prosecutions against them which, as in my case, lead to no result. How are we to
avoid those in office becoming deeply corrupt when everything is devoid of meaning? That is
impossible, not even the highest judge would be able to achieve that for himself. That is why
21
policemen try to steal the clothes off the back of those they arrest, that is why supervisors
break into the homes of people they do not know, that is why innocent people are humiliated
in front of crowds rather than being given a proper trial. The policemen only talked about the
warehouses where they put the property of those they arrest, I would like to see these
warehouses where the hard won possessions of people under arrest is left to decay, if, that is,
it's not stolen by the thieving hands of the warehouse workers."
K. was interrupted by a screeching from the far end of the hall, he shaded his eyes to see that
far, as the dull light of day made the smoke whitish and hard to see through. It was the
washerwoman whom K. had recognised as a likely source of disturbance as soon as she had
entered. It was hard to see now whether it was her fault or not. K. could only see that a man
had pulled her into a corner by the door and was pressing himself against her. But it was not
her who was screaming, but the man, he had opened his mouth wide and looked up at the
ceiling. A small circle had formed around the two of them, the visitors near him in the gallery
seemed delighted that the serious tone K. had introduced into the gathering had been
disturbed in this way. K.'s first thought was to run over there, and he also thought that
everyone would want to bring things back into order there or at least to make the pair leave
the room, but the first row of people in front of him stayed were they were, no-one moved
and no-one let K. through. On the contrary, they stood in his way, old men held out their arms
in front of him and a hand from somewhere—he did not have the time to turn round—took
hold of his collar. K., by this time, had forgotten about the pair, it seemed to him that his
freedom was being limited as if his arrest was being taken seriously, and, without any thought
for what he was doing, he jumped down from the podium. Now he stood face to face with the
crowd. Had he judged the people properly? Had he put too much faith in the effect of his
speech? Had they been putting up a pretence all the time he had been speaking, and now that
he came to the end and to what must follow, were they tired of pretending? What faces they
were, all around him! Dark, little eyes flickered here and there, cheeks drooped down like on
drunken men, their long beards were thin and stiff, if they took hold of them it was more like
they were making their hands into claws, not as if they were taking hold of their own beards.
But underneath those beards—and this was the real discovery made by K.—there were
badges of various sizes and colours shining on the collars of their coats. As far as he could
see, every one of them was wearing one of these badges. All of them belonged to the same
group, even though they seemed to be divided to the right and the left of him, and when he
suddenly turned round he saw the same badge on the collar of the examining judge who
calmly looked down at him with his hands in his lap. "So," called out K., throwing his arms
in the air as if this sudden realisation needed more room, "all of you are working for this
organisation, I see now that you are all the very bunch of cheats and liars I've just been
speaking about, you've all pressed yourselves in here in order to listen in and snoop on me,
you gave the impression of having formed into factions, one of you even applauded me to test
me out, and you wanted to learn how to trap an innocent man! Well, I hope you haven't come
here for nothing, I hope you've either had some fun from someone who expected you to
defend his innocence or else—let go of me or I'll hit you," shouted K. to a quivery old man
who had pressed himself especially close to him—"or else that you've actually learned
something. And so I wish you good luck in your trade." He briskly took his hat from where it
lay on the edge of the table and, surrounded by a silence caused perhaps by the completeness
of their surprise, pushed his way to the exit. However, the examining judge seems to have
moved even more quickly than K., as he was waiting for him at the doorway. "One moment,"
he said. K. stood where he was, but looked at the door with his hand already on its handle
rather than at the judge. "I merely wanted to draw your attention," said the judge, "to
something you seem not yet to be aware of: today, you have robbed yourself of the
advantages that a hearing of this sort always gives to someone who is under arrest." K.
22
laughed towards the door. "You bunch of louts," he called, "you can keep all your hearings as
a present from me," then opened the door and hurried down the steps. Behind him, the noise
of the assembly rose as it became lively once more and probably began to discuss these
events as if making a scientific study of them.
23
Chapter III
In the empty Courtroom—The Student—The Offices
Every day over the following week, K. expected another summons to arrive, he could not
believe that his rejection of any more hearings had been taken literally, and when the
expected summons really had not come by Saturday evening he took it to mean that he was
expected, without being told, to appear at the same place at the same time. So on Sunday, he
set out once more in the same direction, going without hesitation up the steps and through the
corridors; some of the people remembered him and greeted him from their doorways, but he
no longer needed to ask anyone the way and soon arrived at the right door. It was opened as
soon as he knocked and, paying no attention to the woman he had seen last time who was
standing at the doorway, he was about to go straight into the adjoining room when she said to
him "There's no session today." "What do you mean; no session?" he asked, unable to believe
it. But the woman persuaded him by opening the door to the next room. It was indeed empty,
and looked even more dismal empty than it had the previous Sunday. On the podium stood
the table exactly as it had been before with a few books laying on it. "Can I have a look at
those books?" asked K., not because he was especially curious but so that he would not have
come for nothing. "No," said the woman as she re-closed the door, "that's not allowed. Those
books belong to the examining judge." "I see," said K., and nodded, "those books must be law
books, and that's how this court does things, not only to try people who are innocent but even
to try them without letting them know what's going on." "I expect you're right," said the
woman, who had not understood exactly what he meant. "I'd better go away again, then," said
K. "Should I give a message to the examining judge?" asked the woman. "Do you know him,
then?" asked K. "Of course I know him," said the woman, "my husband is the court usher." It
was only now that K. noticed that the room, which before had held nothing but a wash-tub,
had been fitted out as a living room. The woman saw how surprised he was and said, "Yes,
we're allowed to live here as we like, only we have to clear the room out when the court's in
session. There's lots of disadvantages to my husband's job." "It's not so much the room that
surprises me," said K., looking at her crossly, "it's your being married that shocks me." "Are
you thinking about what happened last time the court was in session, when I disturbed what
you were saying?" asked the woman. "Of course," said K., "it's in the past now and I've
nearly forgotten about it, but at the time it made me furious. And now you tell me yourself
that you are a married woman." "It wasn't any disadvantage for you to have your speech
interrupted. The way they talked about you after you'd gone was really bad." "That could well
be," said K., turning away, "but it does not excuse you." "There's no-one I know who'd hold it
against me," said the woman. "Him, who put his arms around me, he's been chasing after me
for a long time. I might not be very attractive for most people, but I am for him. I've got no
protection from him, even my husband has had to get used to it; if he wants to keep his job
he's got to put up with it as that man's a student and he'll almost certainly be very powerful
later on. He's always after me, he'd only just left when you arrived." "That fits in with
everything else," said K., "I'm not surprised." "Do you want to make things a bit better here?"
the woman asked slowly, watching him as if she were saying something that could be as
dangerous for K. as for herself. "That's what I thought when I heard you speak, I really liked
what you said. Mind you, I only heard part of it, I missed the beginning of it and at the end I
was lying on the floor with the student—it's so horrible here," she said after a pause, and took
hold of K.'s hand. "Do you believe you really will be able to make things better?" K. smiled
and twisted his hand round a little in her soft hands. "It's really not my job to make things
better here, as you put it," he said, "and if you said that to the examining judge he would
24
laugh at you or punish you for it. I really would not have become involved in this matter if I
could have helped it, and I would have lost no sleep worrying about how this court needs to
be made better. But because I'm told that I have been arrested—and I am under arrest—it
forces me to take some action, and to do so for my own sake. However, if I can be of some
service to you in the process I will, of course, be glad to do so. And I will be glad to do so not
only for the sake of charity but also because you can be of some help to me." "How could I
help you, then?" said the woman. "You could, for example, show me the books on the table
there." "Yes, certainly," the woman cried, and pulled K. along behind her as she rushed to
them. The books were old and well worn, the cover of one of them had nearly broken through
in its middle, and it was held together with a few threads. "Everything is so dirty here," said
K., shaking his head, and before he could pick the books up the woman wiped some of the
dust off with her apron. K. took hold of the book that lay on top and threw it open, an
indecent picture appeared. A man and a woman sat naked on a sofa, the base intent of
whoever drew it was easy to see but he had been so grossly lacking in skill that all that
anyone could really make out were the man and the woman who dominated the picture with
their bodies, sitting in overly upright postures that created a false perspective and made it
difficult for them to approach each other. K. didn't thumb through that book any more, but
just threw open the next one at its title page, it was a novel with the title, What Grete Suffered
from her Husband, Hans. "So this is the sort of law book they study here," said K., "this is the
sort of person sitting in judgement over me." "I can help you," said the woman, "would you
like me to?" "Could you really do that without placing yourself in danger? You did say earlier
on that your husband is wholly dependent on his superiors." "I still want to help you," said
the woman, "come over here, we've got to talk about it. Don't say any more about what
danger I'm in, I only fear danger where I want to fear it. Come over here." She pointed to the
podium and invited him to sit down on the step with her. "You've got lovely dark eyes," she
said after they had sat down, looking up into K.'s face, "people say I've got nice eyes too, but
yours are much nicer. It was the first thing I noticed when you first came here. That's even
why I came in here, into the assembly room, afterwards, I'd never normally do that, I'm not
really even allowed to." So that's what all this is about, thought K., she's offering herself to
me, she's as degenerate as everything else around here, she's had enough of the court
officials, which is understandable I suppose, and so she approaches any stranger and makes
compliments about his eyes. With that, K. stood up in silence as if he had spoken his thoughts
out loud and thus explained his action to the woman. "I don't think you can be of any
assistance to me," he said, "to be of any real assistance you would need to be in contact with
high officials. But I'm sure you only know the lower employees, and there are crowds of
them milling about here. I'm sure you're very familiar with them and could achieve a great
deal through them, I've no doubt of that, but the most that could be done through them would
have no bearing at all on the final outcome of the trial. You, on the other hand, would lose
some of your friends as a result, and I have no wish of that. Carry on with these people in the
same way as you have been, as it does seem to me to be something you cannot do without. I
have no regrets in saying this as, in return for your compliment to me, I also find you rather
attractive, especially when you look at me as sadly as you are now, although you really have
no reason to do so. You belong to the people I have to combat, and you're very comfortable
among them, you're even in love with the student, or if you don't love him you do at least
prefer him to your husband. It's easy to see that from what you've been saying." "No!" she
shouted, remained sitting where she was and grasped K.'s hand, which he failed to pull away
fast enough. "You can't go away now, you can't go away when you've misjudged me like
that! Are you really capable of going away now? Am I really so worthless that you won't
even do me the favour of staying a little bit longer?" "You misunderstand me," said K., sitting
back down, "if it's really important to you for me to stay here then I'll be glad to do so, I have
25
plenty of time, I came here thinking there would be a trial taking place. All I meant with what
I said just now was to ask you not to do anything on my behalf in the proceedings against me.
But even that is nothing for you to worry about when you consider that there's nothing
hanging on the outcome of this trial, and that, whatever the verdict, I will just laugh at it. And
that's even presupposing it ever even reaches any conclusion, which I very much doubt. I
think it's much more likely that the court officials will be too lazy, too forgetful, or even too
fearful ever to continue with these proceedings and that they will soon be abandoned if they
haven't been abandoned already. It's even possible that they will pretend to be carrying on
with the trial in the hope of receiving a large bribe, although I can tell you now that that will
be quite in vain as I pay bribes to no-one. Perhaps one favour you could do me would be to
tell the examining judge, or anyone else who likes to spread important news, that I will never
be induced to pay any sort of bribe through any stratagem of theirs—and I'm sure they have
many stratagems at their disposal. There is no prospect of that, you can tell them that quite
openly. And what's more, I expect they have already noticed themselves, or even if they
haven't, this affair is really not so important to me as they think. Those gentlemen would only
save some work for themselves, or at least some unpleasantness for me, which, however, I
am glad to endure if I know that each piece of unpleasantness for me is a blow against them.
And I will make quite sure it is a blow against them. Do you actually know the judge?"
"Course I do," said the woman, "he was the first one I thought of when I offered to help you.
I didn't know he's only a minor official, but if you say so it must be true. Mind you, I still
think the report he gives to his superiors must have some influence. And he writes so many
reports. You say these officials are lazy, but they're certainly not all lazy, especially this
examining judge, he writes ever such a lot. Last Sunday, for instance, that session went on till
the evening. Everyone had gone, but the examining judge, he stayed in the hall, I had to bring
him a lamp in, all I had was a little kitchen lamp but he was very satisfied with it and started
to write straight away. Meantime my husband arrived, he always has the day off on Sundays,
we got the furniture back in and got our room sorted out and then a few of the neighbours
came, we sat and talked for a bit by a candle, in short, we forgot all about the examining
judge and went to bed. All of a sudden in the night, it must have been quite late in the night, I
wakes up, next to the bed, there's the examining judge shading the lamp with his hand so that
there's no light from it falls on my husband, he didn't need to be as careful as that, the way
my husband sleeps the light wouldn't have woken him up anyway. I was quite shocked and
nearly screamed, but the judge was very friendly, warned me I should be careful, he
whispered to me he's been writing all this time, and now he's brought me the lamp back, and
he'll never forget how I looked when he found me there asleep. What I mean, with all this, I
just wanted to tell you how the examining judge really does write lots of reports, especially
about you as questioning you was definitely one of the main things on the agenda that
Sunday. If he writes reports as long as that they must be of some importance. And besides all
that, you can see from what happened that the examining judge is after me, and it's right now,
when he's first begun to notice me, that I can have a lot of influence on him. And I've got
other proof I mean a lot to him, too. Yesterday, he sent that student to me, the one he really
trusts and who he works with, he sent him with a present for me, silk stockings. He said it
was because I clear up in the courtroom but that's only a pretence, that job's no more than
what I'm supposed to do, it's what my husband gets paid for. Nice stockings, they are,
look,"—she stretched out her leg, drew her skirt up to her knee and looked, herself, at the
stocking—"they are nice stockings, but they're too good for me, really."
She suddenly interrupted herself and lay her hand on K.'s as if she wanted to calm him down,
and whispered, "Be quiet, Berthold is watching us." K. slowly looked up. In the doorway to
the courtroom stood a young man, he was short, his legs were not quite straight, and he
continually moved his finger round in a short, thin, red beard with which he hoped to make
26
himself look dignified. K. looked at him with some curiosity, he was the first student he had
ever met of the unfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who would
even most likely attain high office one day. The student, in contrast, seemed to take no notice
of K. at all, he merely withdrew his finger from his beard long enough to beckon to the
woman and went over to the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "Don't be
cross with me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, I've got to go to him now,
to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs. But I'll come straight back and then I'll go with
you if you'll take me, I'll go wherever you want, you can do whatever you like with me, I'll be
happy if I can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be best if I could get away from
here for good." She stroked K.'s hand once more, jumped up and ran over to the window.
Before he realised it, K. grasped for her hand but failed to catch it. He really was attracted to
the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no good reason why he should
not give in to her allure. It briefly crossed his mind that the woman meant to entrap him on
behalf of the court, but that was an objection he had no difficulty in fending off. In what way
could she entrap him? Was he not still free, so free that he could crush the entire court
whenever he wanted, at least where it concerned him? Could he not have that much
confidence in himself? And her offer of help sounded sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite
worthless. And maybe there was no better revenge against the examining judge and his
cronies than to take this woman from him and have her for himself. Maybe then, after much
hard work writing dishonest reports about K., the judge would go to the woman's bed late one
night and find it empty. And it would be empty because she belonged to K., because this
woman at the window, this lush, supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy
material belonged to him, totally to him and to him alone. Once he had settled his thoughts
towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quiet conversation at the window was
taking too long, he rapped on the podium with his knuckles, and then even with his fist. The
student briefly looked away from the woman to glance at K. over his shoulder but did allow
himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close to the woman and put his arms
around her. She dropped her head down low as if listening to him carefully, as she did so he
kissed her right on the neck, hardly even interrupting what he was saying. K. saw this as
confirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and which she had already
complained about, he stood up and walked up and down the room. Glancing sideways at the
student, he wondered what would be the quickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was
not unwelcome to him when the student, clearly disturbed by K.'s to-ing and fro-ing which K.
had now developed into a stamping up and down, said to him, "You don't have to stay here,
you know, if you're getting impatient. You could have gone earlier, no-one would have
missed you. In fact you should have gone, you should have left as quickly as possible as soon
as I got here." This comment could have caused all possible rage to break out between them,
but K. also bore in mind that this was a prospective court official speaking to a disfavoured
defendant, and he might well have been taking pride in speaking in this way. K. remained
standing quite close to him and said with a smile, "You're quite right, I am impatient, but the
easiest way to settle this impatience would be if you left us. On the other hand, if you've
come here to study—you are a student, I hear—I'll be quite happy to leave the room to you
and go away with the woman. I'm sure you'll still have a lot of study to do before you're made
into a judge. It's true that I'm still not all that familiar with your branch of jurisprudence but I
take it it involves a lot more than speaking roughly—and I see you have no shame in doing
that extremely well." "He shouldn't have been allowed to move about so freely," said the
student, as if he wanted to give the woman an explanation for K.'s insults, "that was a
mistake. I've told the examining judge so. He should at least have been detained in his room
between hearings. Sometimes it's impossible to understand what the judge thinks he's doing."
"You're wasting your breath," said K., then he reached his hand out towards the woman and
27
said, "come with me." "So that's it," said the student, "oh no, you're not going to get her," and
with a strength you would not have expected from him, he glanced tenderly at her, lifted her
up on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to the door. In this way he
showed, unmistakably, that he was to some extent afraid of K., but he nonetheless dared to
provoke him still further by stroking and squeezing the woman's arm with his free hand. K.
ran the few steps up to him, but when he had reached him and was about to take hold of him
and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said, "It's no good, it's the examining judge who's
sent for me, I daren't go with you, this little bastard ..." and here she ran her hand over the
student's face, "this little bastard won't let me." "And you don't want to be set free!" shouted
K., laying his hand on the student's shoulder, who then snapped at it with his teeth. "No!"
shouted the woman, pushing K. away with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think
you're doing? That'd be the end of me. Let go of him, please just let go of him. He's only
carrying out the judge's orders, he's carrying me to him." "Let him take you then, and I want
to see nothing more of you," said K., enraged by his disappointment and giving the student a
thump in the back so that he briefly stumbled and then, glad that he had not fallen,
immediately jumped up all the higher with his burden. K. followed them slowly. He realised
that this was the first unambiguous setback he had suffered from these people. It was of
course nothing to worry about, he accepted the setback only because he was looking for a
fight. If he stayed at home and carried on with his normal life he would be a thousand times
superior to these people and could get any of them out of his way just with a kick. And he
imagined the most laughable scene possible as an example of this, if this contemptible
student, this inflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneeling at Elsa's bed
wringing his hands and begging for forgiveness. K. so enjoyed imagining this scene that he
decided to take the student along to Elsa with him if ever he should get the opportunity.
K. was curious to see where the woman would be taken and he hurried over to the door, the
student was not likely to carry her through the streets on his arm. It turned out that the
journey was far shorter. Directly opposite the flat there was a narrow flight of wooden steps
which probably led up to the attic, they turned as they went so that it was not possible to see
where they ended. The student carried the woman up these steps, and after the exertions of
running with her he was soon groaning and moving very slowly. The woman waved down at
K. and by raising and lowering her shoulders she tried to show that she was an innocent party
in this abduction, although the gesture did not show a lot of regret. K. watched her without
expression like a stranger, he wanted to show neither that he was disappointed nor that he
would easily get over his disappointment.
The two of them had disappeared, but K. remained standing in the doorway. He had to accept
that the woman had not only cheated him but that she had also lied to him when she said she
was being taken to the examining judge. The examining judge certainly wouldn't be sitting
and waiting in the attic. The wooden stairs would explain nothing to him however long he
stared at them. Then K. noticed a small piece of paper next to them, went across to it and
read, in a childish and unpractised hand, "Entrance to the Court Offices". Were the court
offices here, in the attic of this tenement, then? If that was how they were accommodated it
did not attract much respect, and it was some comfort for the accused to realise how little
money this court had at its disposal if it had to locate its offices in a place where the tenants
of the building, who were themselves among the poorest of people, would throw their
unneeded junk. On the other hand, it was possible that the officials had enough money but
that they squandered it on themselves rather than use it for the court's purposes. Going by K.'s
experience of them so far, that even seemed probable, except that if the court were allowed to
decay in that way it would not just humiliate the accused but also give him more
encouragement than if the court were simply in a state of poverty. K. also now understood
28
that the court was ashamed to summon those it accused to the attic of this building for the
initial hearing, and why it preferred to impose upon them in their own homes. What a
position it was that K. found himself in, compared with the judge sitting up in the attic! K., at
the bank, had a big office with an ante-room, and had an enormous window through which he
could look down at the activity in the square. It was true, though, that he had no secondary
income from bribes and fraud, and he couldn't tell a servant to bring him a woman up to the
office on his arm. K., however, was quite willing to do without such things, in this life at
least. K. was still looking at the notice when a man came up the stairs, looked through the
open door into the living room where it was also possible to see the courtroom, and finally
asked K. whether he had just seen a woman there. "You're the court usher, aren't you?" asked
K. "That's right," said the man, "oh, yes, you're defendant K., I recognise you now as well.
Nice to see you here." And he offered K. his hand, which was far from what K. had expected.
And when K. said nothing, he added, "There's no court session planned for today, though." "I
know that," said K. as he looked at the usher's civilian coat which, beside its ordinary buttons,
displayed two gilded ones as the only sign of his office and seemed to have been taken from
an old army officer's coat. "I was speaking with your wife a little while ago. She is no longer
here. The student has carried her off to the examining judge." "Listen to this," said the usher,
"they're always carrying her away from me. It's Sunday today, and it's not part of my job to
do any work today, but they send me off with some message which isn't even necessary just
to get me away from here. What they do is they send me off not too far away so that I can
still hope to get back on time if I really hurry. So off I go running as fast as I can, shout the
message through the crack in the door of the office I've been sent to, so out of breath they'll
hardly be able to understand it, run back here again, but the student's been even faster than I
have—well he's got less far to go, he's only got to run down the steps. If I wasn't so
dependent on them I'd have squashed the student against the wall here a long time ago. Right
here, next to the sign. I'm always dreaming of doing that. Just here, just above the floor, that's
where he's crushed onto the wall, his arms stretched out, his fingers spread apart, his crooked
legs twisted round into a circle and blood squirted out all around him. It's only ever been a
dream so far, though." "Is there nothing else you do?" asked K. with a smile. "Nothing that I
know of," said the usher. "And it's going to get even worse now, up till now he's only been
carrying her off for himself, now he's started carrying her off for the judge and all, just like
I'd always said he would." "Does your wife, then, not share some of the responsibility?"
asked K. He had to force himself as he asked this question, as he, too, felt so jealous now.
"Course she does," said the usher, "it's more her fault than theirs. It was her who attached
herself to him. All he did, he just chases after any woman. There's five flats in this block
alone where he's been thrown out after working his way in there. And my wife is the best
looking woman in the whole building, but it's me who's not even allowed to defend himself."
"If that's how things are, then there's nothing that can be done," said K. "Well why not?"
asked the usher. "He's a coward that student, if he wants to lay a finger on my wife all you'd
have to do is give him such a good hiding he'd never dare do it again. But I'm not allowed to
do that, and nobody else is going to do me the favour as they're all afraid of his power. The
only one who could do it is a man like you." "What, how could I do it?" asked K. in
astonishment. "Well you're facing a charge, aren't you," said the usher. "Yes, but that's all the
more reason for me to be afraid. Even if he has no influence on the outcome of the trial he
probably has some on the initial examination." "Yes, exactly," said the usher, as if K.'s view
had been just as correct as his own. "Only we don't usually get any trials heard here with no
hope at all." "I am not of the same opinion," said K., "although that ought not to prevent me
from dealing with the student if the opportunity arises." "I would be very grateful to you,"
said the usher of the court, somewhat formally, not really seeming to believe that his highest
wish could be fulfilled. "Perhaps," continued K., "perhaps there are some other officials of
29
yours here, perhaps all of them, who would deserve the same." "Oh yes, yes," said the usher,
as if this was a matter of course. Then he looked at K. trustingly which, despite all his
friendliness, he had not done until then, and added, "they're always rebelling." But the
conversation seemed to have become a little uncomfortable for him, as he broke it off by
saying, "now I have to report to the office. Would you like to come with me?" "There's
nothing for me to do there," said K. "You'd be able to have a look at it. No-one will take any
notice of you." "Is it worth seeing then?" asked K. hesitatingly, although he felt very keen to
go with him. "Well," said the usher, "I thought you'd be interested in it." "Alright then," said
K. finally, "I'll come with you." And, quicker than the usher himself, he ran up the steps.
At the entrance he nearly fell over, as behind the door there was another step. "They don't
show much concern for the public," he said. "They don't show any concern at all," said the
usher, "just look at the waiting room here." It consisted of a long corridor from which roughly
made doors led out to the separate departments of the attic. There was no direct source of
light but it was not entirely dark as many of the departments, instead of solid walls, had just
wooden bars reaching up to the ceiling to separate them from the corridor. The light made its
way in through them, and it was also possible to see individual officials through them as they
sat writing at their desks or stood up at the wooden frameworks and watched the people on
the corridor through the gaps. There were only a few people in the corridor, probably because
it was Sunday. They were not very impressive. They sat, equally spaced, on two rows of long
wooden benches which had been placed along both sides of the corridor. All of them were
carelessly dressed although the expressions on their faces, their bearing, the style of their
beards and many details which were hard to identify showed that they belonged to the upper
classes. There were no coat hooks for them to use, and so they had placed their hats under the
bench, each probably having followed the example of the others. When those who were
sitting nearest the door saw K. and the usher of the court they stood up to greet them, and
when the others saw that, they also thought they had to greet them, so that as the two of them
went by all the people there stood up. None of them stood properly upright, their backs were
bowed, their knees bent, they stood like beggars on the street. K. waited for the usher, who
was following just behind him. "They must all be very dispirited," he said. "Yes," said the
usher, "they are the accused, everyone you see here has been accused." "Really!" said K.
"They're colleagues of mine then." And he turned to the nearest one, a tall, thin man with hair
that was nearly grey. "What is it you are waiting for here?" asked K., politely, but the man
was startled at being spoken to unexpectedly, which was all the more pitiful to see because
the man clearly had some experience of the world and elsewhere would certainly have been
able to show his superiority and would not have easily given up the advantage he had
acquired. Here, though, he did not know what answer to give to such a simple question and
looked round at the others as if they were under some obligation to help him, and as if no-one
could expect any answer from him without this help. Then the usher of the court stepped
forward to him and, in order to calm him down and raise his spirits, said, "The gentleman
here's only asking what it is you're waiting for. You can give him an answer." The voice of
the usher was probably familiar to him, and had a better effect than K.'s. "I'm ... I'm
waiting...." he began, and then came to a halt. He had clearly chosen this beginning so that he
could give a precise answer to the question, but now he didn't know how to continue. Some
of the others waiting had come closer and stood round the group, the usher of the court said
to them, "Get out the way, keep the gangway free." They moved back slightly, but not as far
as where they had been sitting before. In the meantime, the man whom K. had first
approached had pulled himself together and even answered him with a smile. "A month ago I
made some applications for evidence to be heard in my case, and I'm waiting for it to be
settled." "You certainly seem to be going to a lot of effort," said K. "Yes," said the man, "it is
my affair after all." "Not everyone thinks the same way as you do," said K. "I've been
30
indicted as well but I swear on my soul that I've neither submitted evidence nor done
anything else of the sort. Do you really think that's necessary?" "I don't really know, exactly,"
said the man, once more totally unsure of himself; he clearly thought K. was joking with him
and therefore probably thought it best to repeat his earlier answer in order to avoid making
any new mistakes. With K. looking at him impatiently, he just said, "as far as I'm concerned,
I've applied to have this evidence heard." "Perhaps you don't believe I've been indicted?"
asked K. "Oh, please, I certainly do," said the man, stepping slightly to one side, but there
was more anxiety in his answer than belief. "You don't believe me then?" asked K., and took
hold of his arm, unconsciously prompted by the man's humble demeanour, and as if he
wanted to force him to believe him. But he did not want to hurt the man and had only taken
hold of him very lightly. Nonetheless, the man cried out as if K. had grasped him not with
two fingers but with red hot tongs. Shouting in this ridiculous way finally made K. tired of
him, if he didn't believe he was indicted then so much the better; maybe he even thought K.
was a judge. And before leaving, he held him a lot harder, shoved him back onto the bench
and walked on. "These defendants are so sensitive, most of them," said the usher of the court.
Almost all of those who had been waiting had now assembled around the man who, by now,
had stopped shouting and they seemed to be asking him lots of precise questions about the
incident. K. was approached by a security guard, identifiable mainly by his sword, of which
the scabbard seemed to be made of aluminium. This greatly surprised K., and he reached out
for it with his hand. The guard had come because of the shouting and asked what had been
happening. The usher of the court said a few words to try and calm him down but the guard
explained that he had to look into it himself, saluted, and hurried on, walking with very short
steps, probably because of gout.
K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people, especially as he saw a turning
off the corridor, about half way along it on the right hand side, where there was no door to
stop him going that way. He asked the usher whether that was the right way to go, the usher
nodded, and that is the way that K. went. The usher remained always one or two steps behind
K., which he found irritating as in a place like this it could give the impression that he was
being driven along by someone who had arrested him, so he frequently waited for the usher
to catch up, but the usher always remained behind him. In order to put an end to his
discomfort, K. finally said, "Now that I've seen what it looks like here, I'd like to go." "You
haven't seen everything yet," said the usher ingenuously. "I don't want to see everything,"
said K., who was also feeling very tired, "I want to go, what is the way to the exit?" "You
haven't got lost, have you?" asked the usher in amazement, "you go down this way to the
corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as the door." "Come with me," said
K., "show me the way, I'll miss it, there are so many different ways here." "It's the only way
there is," said the usher, who had now started to sound quite reproachful, "I can't go back
with you again, I've got to hand in my report, and I've already lost a lot of time because of
you as it is." "Come with me!" K. repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught
the usher out in a lie. "Don't shout like that," whispered the usher, "there's offices all round us
here. If you don't want to go back by yourself come on a bit further with me or else wait here
till I've sorted out my report, then I'll be glad to go back with you again." "No, no," said K., "I
will not wait and you must come with me now." K. had still not looked round at anything at
all in the room where he found himself, and it was only when one of the many wooden doors
all around him opened that he noticed it. A young woman, probably summoned by the
loudness of K.'s voice, entered and asked, "What is it the gentleman wants?" In the darkness
behind her there was also a man approaching. K. looked at the usher. He had, after all, said
that no-one would take any notice of K., and now there were two people coming, it only
needed a few and everyone in the office would become aware of him and asking for
explanations as to why he was there. The only understandable and acceptable thing to say
31
was that he was accused of something and wanted to know the date of his next hearing, but
this was an explanation he did not want to give, especially as it was not true—he had only
come out of curiosity. Or else, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he wanted to
ascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on the outside. And it did seem
that he had been quite right in this supposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was
disturbed enough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame of mind just then
to face a high official such as might appear from behind any door, and he wanted to go, either
with the usher of the court or, if needs be, alone.
But he must have seemed very odd standing there in silence, and the young woman and the
usher were indeed looking at him as if they thought he would go through some major
metamorphosis any second which they didn't want to miss seeing. And in the doorway stood
the man whom K. had noticed in the background earlier, he held firmly on to the beam above
the low door swinging a little on the tips of his feet as if becoming impatient as he watched.
But the young woman was the first to recognise that K.'s behaviour was caused by his feeling
slightly unwell, she brought a chair and asked, "Would you not like to sit down?" K. sat down
immediately and, in order to keep his place better, put his elbows on the armrests. "You're a
little bit dizzy, aren't you?" she asked him. Her face was now close in front of him, it bore the
severe expression that many young women have just when they're in the bloom of their
youth. "It's nothing for you to worry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost
everyone gets an attack like that the first time they come here. This is your first time is it.
Yes, it's nothing unusual then. The sun burns down on the roof and the hot wood makes the
air so thick and heavy. It makes this place rather unsuitable for offices, whatever other
advantages it might offer. But the air is almost impossible to breathe on days when there's a
lot of business, and that's almost every day. And when you think that there's a lot of washing
put out to dry here as well—and we can't stop the tenants doing that—it's not surprising you
started to feel unwell. But you get used to the air alright in the end. When you're here for the
second or third time you'll hardly notice how oppressive the air is. Are you feeling any better
now?" K. made no answer, he felt too embarrassed at being put at the mercy of these people
by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling ill made him feel not better but a
little worse. The girl noticed it straight away, and to make the air fresher for K., she took a
window pole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatch directly above
K.'s head that led to the outside. But so much soot fell in that the girl had to immediately
close the hatch again and clean the soot off K.'s hands with her handkerchief, as K. was too
tired to do that for himself. He would have liked just to sit quietly where he was until he had
enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people made about him the sooner that would be.
But then the girl said, "You can't stay here, we're in people's way here...." K. looked at her as
if to ask whose way they were impeding. "If you like, I can take you to the sick room," and
turning to the man in the doorway said, "please help me." The man immediately came over to
them, but K. did not want to go to the sick room, that was just what he wanted to avoid, being
led further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it must become. So he
said, "I am able to walk now," and stood up, shaking after becoming used to sitting so
comfortably. But then he was unable to stay upright. "I can't manage it," he said shaking his
head, and sat down again with a sigh. He remembered the usher who, despite everything,
would have been able to lead him out of there but who seemed to have gone long before. K.
looked out between the man and the young woman who were standing in front of him but
was unable to find the usher. "I think," said the man, who was elegantly dressed and whose
appearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that had two long, sharply
tailored points, "the gentleman is feeling unwell because of the atmosphere here, so the best
thing, and what he would most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him
out of the offices altogether." "That's right," exclaimed K., with such joy that he nearly
32
interrupted what the man was saying, "I'm sure that'll make me feel better straight away, I'm
really not that weak, all I need is a little support under my arms, I won't cause you much
trouble, it's not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then I'll sit on the stairs for
a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attacks like this at all, I'm surprised at it
myself. I also work in an office and I'm quite used to office air, but here it seems to be too
strong, you've said so yourselves. So please, be so kind as to help me on my way a little, I'm
feeling dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if I stand up by myself." And with that he raised
his shoulders to make it easier for the two of them to take him by the arms.
The man, however, didn't follow this suggestion but just stood there with his hands in his
trouser pockets and laughed out loud. "There, you see," he said to the girl, "I was quite right.
The gentleman is only unwell here, and not in general." The young woman smiled too, but
lightly tapped the man's arm with the tips of her fingers as if he had allowed himself too
much fun with K. "So what do you think, then?" said the man, still laughing, "I really do want
to lead the gentleman out of here." "That's alright, then," said the girl, briefly inclining her
charming head. "Don't worry too much about him laughing," said the girl to K., who had
become unhappy once more and stared quietly in front of himself as if needing no further
explanation. "This gentleman—may I introduce you?"—(the man gave his permission with a
wave of the hand)—"so, this gentleman's job is to give out information. He gives all the
information they need to people who are waiting, as our court and its offices are not very well
known among the public he gets asked for quite a lot. He has an answer for every question,
you can try him out if you feel like it. But that's not his only distinction, his other distinction
is his elegance of dress. We, that's to say all of us who work in the offices here, we decided
that the information-giver would have to be elegantly dressed as he continually has to deal
with the litigants and he's the first one they meet, so he needs to give a dignified first
impression. The rest of us I'm afraid, as you can see just by looking at me, dress very badly
and old-fashioned; and there's not much point in spending much on clothes anyway, as we
hardly ever leave the offices, we even sleep here. But, as I said, we decided that the
information-giver would have to have nice clothes. As the management here is rather peculiar
in this respect, and they would get them for us, we had a collection—some of the litigants
contributed too—and bought him these lovely clothes and some others besides. So everything
would be ready for him to give a good impression, except that he spoils it again by laughing
and frightening people." "That's how it is," said the man, mocking her, "but I don't understand
why it is that you're explaining all our intimate facts to the gentleman, or rather why it is that
you're pressing them on him, as I'm sure he's not all interested. Just look at him sitting there,
it's clear he's occupied with his own affairs." K. just did not feel like contradicting him. The
girl's intention may have been good, perhaps she was under instructions to distract him or to
give him the chance to collect himself, but the attempt had not worked. "I had to explain to
him why you were laughing," said the girl. "I suppose it was insulting." "I think he would
forgive even worse insults if I finally took him outside." K. said nothing, did not even look
up, he tolerated the two of them negotiating over him like an object, that was even what
suited him best. But suddenly he felt the information-giver's hand on one arm and the young
woman's hand on the other. "Up you get then, weakling," said the information-giver. "Thank
you both very much," said K., pleasantly surprised, as he slowly rose and personally guided
these unfamiliar hands to the places where he most needed support. As they approached the
corridor, the girl said quietly into K.'s ear, "I must seem to think it's very important to show
the information-giver in a good light, but you shouldn't doubt what I say, I just want to say
the truth. He isn't hard-hearted. It's not really his job to help litigants outside if they're unwell
but he's doing it anyway, as you can see. I don't suppose any of us is hard-hearted, perhaps
we'd all like to be helpful, but working for the court offices it's easy for us to give the
impression we are hard-hearted and don't want to help anyone. It makes me quite sad."
33
"Would you not like to sit down here a while?" asked the information-giver, there were
already in the corridor and just in front of the defendant whom K. had spoken to earlier. K.
felt almost ashamed to be seen by him, earlier he had stood so upright in front of him and
now he had to be supported by two others, his hat was held up by the information-giver
balanced on outstretched fingers, his hair was dishevelled and hung down onto the sweat on
his forehead. But the defendant seemed to notice nothing of what was going on and just stood
there humbly, as if wanting to apologise to the information-giver for being there. The
information-giver looked past him. "I know," he said, "that my case can't be settled today, not
yet, but I've come in anyway, I thought, I thought I could wait here anyway, it's Sunday
today, I've got plenty of time, and I'm not disturbing anyone here." "There's no need to be so
apologetic," said the information-giver, "it's very commendable for you to be so attentive.
You are taking up space here when you don't need to but as long as you don't get in my way I
will do nothing to stop you following the progress of your case as closely as you like. When
one has seen so many people who shamefully neglect their cases one learns to show patience
with people like you. Do sit down." "He's very good with the litigants," whispered the girl. K.
nodded, but started to move off again when the information-giver repeated, "Would you not
like to sit down here a while?" "No," said K., "I don't want to rest." He had said that as
decisively as he could, but in fact it would have done him a lot of good to sit down. It was as
if he were suffering sea-sickness. He felt as if he were on a ship in a rough sea, as if the water
were hitting against the wooden walls, a thundering from the depths of the corridor as if the
torrent were crashing over it, as if the corridor were swaying and the waiting litigants on each
side of it rising and sinking. It made the calmness of the girl and the man leading him all the
more incomprehensible. He was at their mercy, if they let go of him he would fall like a
board. Their little eyes glanced here and there, K. could feel the evenness of their steps but
could not do the same, as from step to step he was virtually being carried. He finally noticed
they were speaking to him but he did not understand them, all he heard was a noise that filled
all the space and through which there seemed to be an unchanging higher note sounding, like
a siren. "Louder," he whispered with his head sunk low, ashamed at having to ask them to
speak louder when he knew they had spoken loudly enough, even if it had been, for him,
incomprehensible. At last, a draught of cool air blew in his face as if a gap had been torn out
in the wall in front of him, and next to him he heard someone say, "First he says he wants to
go, and then you can tell him a hundred times that this is the way out and he doesn't move."
K. became aware that he was standing in front of the way out, and that the young woman had
opened the door. It seemed to him that all his strength returned to him at once, and to get a
foretaste of freedom he stepped straight on to one of the stairs and took his leave there of his
companions, who bowed to him. "Thank you very much," he repeated, shook their hands
once more and did not let go until he thought he saw that they found it hard to bear the
comparatively fresh air from the stairway after being so long used to the air in the offices.
They were hardly able to reply, and the young woman might even have fallen over if K. had
not shut the door extremely fast. K. then stood still for a while, combed his hair with the help
of a pocket mirror, picked up his hat from the next stair—the information-giver must have
thrown it down there—and then he ran down the steps so fresh and in such long leaps that the
contrast with his previous state nearly frightened him. His normally sturdy state of health had
never prepared him for surprises such as this. Did his body want to revolt and cause him a
new trial as he was bearing the old one with such little effort? He did not quite reject the idea
that he should see a doctor the next time he had the chance, but whatever he did—and this
was something on which he could advise himself—he wanted to spend all Sunday mornings
in future better than he had spent this one.
34
Chapter IV
Miss Bürstner's Friend
For some time after this, K. found it impossible to exchange even just a few words with Miss
Bürstner. He tried to reach her in many and various ways but she always found a way to
avoid it. He would come straight home from the office, remain in her room without the light
on, and sit on the sofa with nothing more to distract him than keeping watch on the empty
hallway. If the maid went by and closed the door of the apparently empty room he would get
up after a while and open it again. He got up an hour earlier than usual in the morning so that
he might perhaps find Miss Bürstner alone as she went to the office. But none of these efforts
brought any success. Then he wrote her a letter, both to the office and the flat, attempting
once more to justify his behaviour, offered to make whatever amends he could, promised
never to cross whatever boundary she might set him and begged merely to have the chance to
speak to her some time, especially as he was unable to do anything with Mrs. Grubach either
until he had spoken with Miss Bürstner, he finally informed her that the following Sunday he
would stay in his room all day waiting for a sign from her that there was some hope of his
request being fulfilled, or at least that she would explain to him why she could not fulfil it
even though he had promised to observe whatever stipulations she might make. The letters
were not returned, but there was no answer either. However, on the following Sunday there
was a sign that seemed clear enough. It was still early when K. noticed, through the keyhole,
that there was an unusual level of activity in the hallway which soon abated. A French
teacher, although she was German and called Montag, a pale and febrile girl with a slight
limp who had previously occupied a room of her own, was moving into Miss Bürstner's
room. She could be seen shuffling through the hallway for several hours, there was always
another piece of clothing or a blanket or a book that she had forgotten and had to be fetched
specially and brought into the new home.
When Mrs. Grubach brought K. his breakfast—ever since the time when she had made K. so
cross she didn't trust the maid to do the slightest job—he had no choice but to speak to her,
for the first time in five days. "Why is there so much noise in the hallway today?" he asked as
she poured his coffee out, "Can't something be done about it? Does this clearing out have to
be done on a Sunday?" K. did not look up at Mrs. Grubach, but he saw nonetheless that she
seemed to feel some relief as she breathed in. Even sharp questions like this from Mr. K. she
perceived as forgiveness, or as the beginning of forgiveness. "We're not clearing anything
out, Mr. K.," she said, "it's just that Miss Montag is moving in with Miss Bürstner and is
moving her things across." She said nothing more, but just waited to see how K. would take it
and whether he would allow her to carry on speaking. But K. kept her in uncertainty, took the
spoon and pensively stirred his coffee while he remained silent. Then he looked up at her and
said, "What about the suspicions you had earlier about Miss Bürstner, have you given them
up?" "Mr. K.," called Mrs. Grubach, who had been waiting for this very question, as she put
her hands together and held them out towards him. "I just made a chance remark and you
took it so badly. I didn't have the slightest intention of offending anyone, not you or anyone
else. You've known me for long enough, Mr. K., I'm sure you're convinced of that. You don't
know how I've been suffering for the past few days! That I should tell lies about my tenants!
And you, Mr. K., you believed it! And said I should give you notice! Give you notice!" At
this last outcry, Mrs. Grubach was already choking back her tears, she raised her apron to her
face and blubbered out loud.
35
"Oh, don't cry Mrs. Grubach," said K., looking out the window, he was thinking only of Miss
Bürstner and how she was accepting an unknown girl into her room. "Now don't cry," he said
again as he turned his look back into the room where Mrs. Grubach was still crying. "I meant
no harm either when I said that. It was simply a misunderstanding between us. That can
happen even between old friends sometimes." Mrs. Grubach pulled her apron down to below
her eyes to see whether K. really was attempting a reconciliation. "Well, yes, that's how it is,"
said K., and as Mrs. Grubach's behaviour indicated that the captain had said nothing he dared
to add, "Do you really think, then, that I'd want to make an enemy of you for the sake of a girl
we hardly know?" "Yes, you're quite right, Mr. K.," said Mrs. Grubach, and then, to her
misfortune, as soon as she felt just a little freer to speak, she added something rather inept. "I
kept asking myself why it was that Mr. K. took such an interest in Miss Bürstner. Why does
he quarrel with me over her when he knows that any cross word from him and I can't sleep
that night? And I didn't say anything about Miss Bürstner that I hadn't seen with my own
eyes." K. said nothing in reply, he should have chased her from the room as soon as she had
opened her mouth, and he didn't want to do that. He contented himself with merely drinking
his coffee and letting Mrs. Grubach feel that she was superfluous. Outside, the dragging steps
of Miss Montag could still be heard as she went from one side of the hallway to the other.
"Do you hear that?" asked K. pointing his hand at the door. "Yes," said Mrs. Grubach with a
sigh, "I wanted to give her some help and I wanted the maid to help her too but she's
stubborn, she wants to move everything in herself. I wonder at Miss Bürstner. I often feel it's
a burden for me to have Miss Montag as a tenant but Miss Bürstner accepts her into her room
with herself." "There's nothing there for you to worry about," said K., crushing the remains of
a sugar lump in his cup. "Does she cause you any trouble?" "No," said Mrs. Grubach, "in
itself it's very good to have her there, it makes another room free for me and I can let my
nephew, the captain, occupy it. I began to worry he might be disturbing you when I had to let
him live in the living room next to you over the last few days. He's not very considerate."
"What an idea!" said K. standing up, "there's no question of that. You seem to think that
because I can't stand this to-ing and fro-ing of Miss Montag that I'm over-sensitive—and
there she goes back again." Mrs. Grubach appeared quite powerless. "Should I tell her to
leave moving the rest of her things over till later, then, Mr. K.? If that's what you want I'll do
it immediately." "But she has to move in with Miss Bürstner!" said K. "Yes," said Mrs.
Grubach, without quite understanding what K. meant. "So she has to take her things over
there." Mrs. Grubach just nodded. K. was irritated all the more by this dumb helplessness
which, seen from the outside, could have seemed like a kind of defiance on her part. He
began to walk up and down the room between the window and the door, thus depriving Mrs.
Grubach of the chance to leave, which she otherwise probably would have done.
Just as K. once more reached the door, someone knocked at it. It was the maid, to say that
Miss Montag would like to have a few words with Mr. K., and therefore requested that he
come to the dining room where she was waiting for him. K. heard the maid out thoughtfully,
and then looked back at the shocked Mrs. Grubach in a way that was almost contemptuous.
His look seemed to be saying that K. had been expecting this invitation for Miss Montag for a
long time, and that it was confirmation of the suffering he had been made to endure that
Sunday morning from Mrs. Grubach's tenants. He sent the maid back with the reply that he
was on his way, then he went to the wardrobe to change his coat, and in answer to Mrs.
Grubach's gentle whining about the nuisance Miss Montag was causing merely asked her to
clear away the breakfast things. "But you've hardly touched it," said Mrs. Grubach. "Oh just
take it away!" shouted K. It seemed to him that Miss Montag was mixed up in everything and
made it repulsive to him.
36
As he went through the hallway he looked at the closed door of Miss Bürstner's room. But it
wasn't there that he was invited, but the dining room, to which he yanked the door open
without knocking.
The room was long but narrow with one window. There was only enough space available to
put two cupboards at an angle in the corner by the door, and the rest of the room was entirely
taken up with the long dining table which started by the door and reached all the way to the
great window, which was thus made almost inaccessible. The table was already laid for a
large number of people, as on Sundays almost all the tenants ate their dinner here at midday.
When K. entered, Miss Montag came towards him from the window along one side of the
table. They greeted each other in silence. Then Miss Montag, her head unusually erect as
always, said, "I'm not sure whether you know me." K. looked at her with a frown. "Of course
I do," he said, "you've been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some time now." "But I
get the impression you don't pay much attention to what's going on in the lodging house,"
said Miss Montag. "No," said K. "Would you not like to sit down?" said Miss Montag. In
silence, the two of them drew chairs out from the farthest end of the table and sat down
facing each other. But Miss Montag stood straight up again as she had left her handbag on the
window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffled down the whole length of the room. When she
came back, the handbag lightly swinging, she said, "I'd like just to have a few words with you
on behalf of my friend. She would have come herself, but she's feeling a little unwell today.
Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and listen to me instead. There's anyway nothing
that she could have said that I won't. On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more than
her because I'm relatively impartial. Would you not agree?" "What is there to say, then?"
answered K., who was tired of Miss Montag continuously watching his lips. In that way she
took control of what he wanted to say before he said it. "Miss Bürstner clearly refuses to
grant me the personal meeting that I asked her for." "That's how it is," said Miss Montag, "or
rather, that's not at all how it is, the way you put it is remarkably severe. Generally speaking,
meetings are neither granted nor the opposite. But it can be that meetings are considered
unnecessary, and that's how it is here. Now, after your comment, I can speak openly. You
asked my friend, verbally or in writing, for the chance to speak with her. Now my friend is
aware of your reasons for asking for this meeting—or at least I suppose she is—and so, for
reasons I know nothing about, she is quite sure that it would be of no benefit to anyone if this
meeting actually took place. Moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she
made it clear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself either, she feels
that it can only have been a matter of chance that such an idea came to you, and that even
without any explanations from her, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have
not done so already, the futility of your idea. My answer to that is that although it may be
quite right, I consider it advantageous, if the matter is to be made perfectly clear, to give you
an explicit answer. I offered my services in taking on the task, and after some hesitation my
friend conceded. I hope, however, also to have acted in your interests, as even the slightest
uncertainty in the least significant of matters will always remain a cause of suffering and if,
as in this case, it can be removed without substantial effort, then it is better if that is done
without delay." "I thank you," said K. as soon as Miss Montag had finished. He stood slowly
up, looked at her, then across the table, then out the window—the house opposite stood there
in the sun—and went to the door. Miss Montag followed him a few paces, as if she did not
quite trust him. At the door, however, both of them had to step back as it opened and Captain
Lanz entered. This was the first time that K. had seen him close up. He was a large man of
about forty with a tanned, fleshy face. He bowed slightly, intending it also for K., and then
went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed her hand. He was very elegant in the way
he moved. The courtesy he showed towards Miss Montag made a striking contrast with the
37
way she had been treated by K. Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross with K.
as it even seemed to him that she wanted to introduce the captain. K. however, did not want
to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sort of friendliness either to Miss
Montag or to the captain, the kiss on the hand had, for K., bound them into a group which
would keep him at a distance from Miss Bürstner whilst at the same time seeming to be
totally harmless and unselfish. K. thought, however, that he saw more than that, he thought he
also saw that Miss Montag had chosen a means of doing it that was good, but two-edged. She
exaggerated the importance of the relationship between K. and Miss Bürstner, and above all
she exaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and she tried at the same time to
make out that K. was exaggerating everything. She would be disappointed, K. did not want to
exaggerate anything, he was aware that Miss Bürstner was a little typist who would not offer
him much resistance for long. In doing so he deliberately took no account of what Mrs.
Grubach had told him about Miss Bürstner. All these things were going through his mind as
he left the room with hardly a polite word. He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little
laugh from Miss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought him to the
idea that he might prepare a surprise for the two of them, the captain and Miss Montag. He
looked round and listened to find out if there might be any disturbance from any of the
surrounding rooms, everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversation
from the dining room and Mrs. Grubach's voice from the passage leading to the kitchen. This
seemed an opportune time, K. went to Miss Bürstner's room and knocked gently. There was
no sound so he knocked again but there was still no answer in reply. Was she asleep? Or was
she really unwell? Or was she just pretending as she realised it could only be K. knocking so
gently? K. assumed she was pretending and knocked harder, eventually, when the knocking
brought no result, he carefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was
not only improper but also pointless. In the room there was no-one. What's more, it looked
hardly at all like the room K. had known before. Against the wall there were now two beds
behind one another, there were clothes piled up on three chairs near the door, a wardrobe
stood open. Miss Bürstner must have gone out while Miss Montag was speaking to him in the
dining room. K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardly expected to be able to find
Miss Bürstner so easily and had made this attempt for little more reason than to spite Miss
Montag. But that made it all the more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the door
again, he saw Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway of the dining room.
They had probably been standing there ever since K. had opened the door, they avoided
seeming to observe K. but chatted lightly and followed his movements with glances, the
absent minded glances to the side such as you make during a conversation. But these glances
were heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back into his own room.
38
Chapter V
The whip-man
One evening, a few days later, K. was walking along one of the corridors that separated his
office from the main stairway—he was nearly the last one to leave for home that evening,
there remained only a couple of workers in the light of a single bulb in the dispatch
department—when he heard a sigh from behind a door which he had himself never opened
but which he had always thought just led into a junk room. He stood in amazement and
listened again to establish whether he might not be mistaken. For a while there was silence,
but then came some more sighs. His first thought was to fetch one of the servitors, it might
well have been worth having a witness present, but then he was taken by an uncontrollable
curiosity that make him simply yank the door open. It was, as he had thought, a junk room.
Old, unusable forms, empty stone ink-bottles lay scattered behind the entrance. But in the
cupboard-like room itself stood three men, crouching under the low ceiling. A candle fixed
on a shelf gave them light. "What are you doing here?" asked K. quietly, but crossly and
without thinking. One of the men was clearly in charge, and attracted attention by being
dressed in a kind of dark leather costume which left his neck and chest and his arms exposed.
He did not answer. But the other two called out, "Mr. K.! We're to be beaten because you
made a complaint about us to the examining judge." And now, K. finally realised that it was
actually the two policemen, Franz and Willem, and that the third man held a cane in his hand
with which to beat them. "Well," said K., staring at them, "I didn't make any complaint, I
only said what took place in my home. And your behaviour was not entirely unobjectionable,
after all." "Mr. K.," said Willem, while Franz clearly tried to shelter behind him as protection
from the third man, "if you knew how badly we get paid you wouldn't think so badly of us.
I've got a family to feed, and Franz here wanted to get married, you just have to get more
money where you can, you can't do it just by working hard, not however hard you try. I was
sorely tempted by your fine clothes, policemen aren't allowed to do that sort of thing, course
they aren't, and it wasn't right of us, but it's tradition that the clothes go to the officers, that's
how it's always been, believe me; and it's understandable too, isn't it, what can things like that
mean for anyone unlucky enough to be arrested. But if he starts talking about it openly then
the punishment has to follow." "I didn't know about any of this that you've been telling me,
and I made no sort of request that you be punished, I was simply acting on principle."
"Franz," said Willem, turning to the other policeman, "didn't I tell you that the gentleman
didn't say he wanted us to be punished. Now you can hear for yourself, he didn't even know
we'd have to be punished." "Don't you let them persuade you, talking like that," said the third
man to K., "this punishment is both just and unavoidable." "Don't listen to him," said Willem,
interrupting himself only to quickly bring his hand to his mouth when it had received a stroke
of the cane, "we're only being punished because you made a complaint against us. Nothing
would have happened to us otherwise, not even if they'd found out what we'd done. Can you
call that justice? Both of us, me especially, we'd proved our worth as good police officers
over a long period—you've got to admit yourself that as far as official work was concerned
we did the job well—things looked good for us, we had prospects, it's quite certain that we
would've been made whip-men too, like this one, only he had the luck not to have anyone
make a complaint about him, as you really don't get many complaints like that. Only that's all
finished now, Mr. K., our careers are at an end, we're going to have to do work now that's far
inferior to police work and besides all this we're going to get this terrible, painful beating."
"Can the cane really cause so much pain, then?" asked K., testing the cane that the whip-man
swang in front of him. "We're going to have to strip off totally naked," said Willem. "Oh, I
39
see," said K., looking straight at the whip-man, his skin was burned brown like a sailor's, and
his face showed health and vigour. "Is there then no possibility of sparing these two their
beating?" he asked him. "No," said the whip-man, shaking his head with a laugh. "Get
undressed!" he ordered the policemen. And to K. he said, "You shouldn't believe everything
they tell you, it's the fear of being beaten, it's already made them a bit weak in the head. This
one here, for instance," he pointed at Willem, "all that he told you about his career prospects,
it's just ridiculous. Look at him, look how fat he is—the first strokes of the cane will just get
lost in all that fat. Do you know what it is that's made him so fat. He's in the habit of,
everyone that gets arrested by him, he eats their breakfast. Didn't he eat up your breakfast?
Yeah, I thought as much. But a man with a belly like that can't be made into a whip-man and
never will be, that is quite out of the question." "There are whip-men like that," Willem
insisted, who had just released the belt of this trousers. "No," said the whip-man, striking him
such a blow with the cane on his neck that it made him wince, "you shouldn't be listening to
this, just get undressed." "I would make it well worth your while if you would let them go,"
said K., and without looking at the whip-man again—as such matters are best carried on with
both pairs of eyes turned down—he pulled out his wallet. "And then you'd try and put in a
complaint against me, too," said the whip-man, "and get me flogged. No, no!" "Now, do be
reasonable," said K., "if I had wanted to get these two punished I would not now be trying to
buy their freedom, would I? I could simply close the door here behind me, go home and see
or hear nothing more of it. But that's not what I'm doing, it really is of much more importance
to me to let them go free; if I had realised they would be punished, or even that they might be
punished, I would never have named them in the first place as they are not the ones I hold
responsible. It's the organisation that's to blame, the high officials are the ones to blame."
"That's how it is!" shouted the policemen, who then immediately received another blow on
their backs, which were by now exposed. "If you had a senior judge here beneath your stick,"
said K., pressing down the cane as he spoke to stop it being raised once more, "I really would
do nothing to stop you, on the contrary, I would even pay you money to give you all the more
strength." "Yeah, that's all very plausible, what you're saying there," said the whip-man, "only
I'm not the sort of person you can bribe. It's my job to flog people, so I flog them." Franz, the
policeman, had been fairly quiet so far, probably in expectation of a good result from K.'s
intervention, but now he stepped forward to the door wearing just his trousers, knelt down
hanging on to K.'s arm and whispered, "Even if you can't get mercy shown for both of us, at
least try and get me set free. Willem is older than me, he's less sensitive than me in every
way, he even got a light beating a couple of years ago, but my record's still clean, I only did
things the way I did because Willem led me on to it, he's been my teacher both for good and
bad. Down in front of the bank my poor bride is waiting for me at the entrance, I'm so
ashamed of myself, it's pitiful." His face was flowing over with tears, and he wiped it dry on
K.'s coat. "I'm not going to wait any longer," said the whip-man, taking hold of the cane in
both hands and laying in to Franz while Willem cowered back in a corner and looked on
secretly, not even daring to turn his head. Then, the sudden scream that shot out from Franz
was long and irrevocable, it seemed to come not from a human being but from an instrument
that was being tortured, the whole corridor rang with it, it must have been heard by everyone
in the building. "Don't shout like that!", called out K., unable to prevent himself, and, as he
looked anxiously in the direction from which the servitor would come, he gave Franz a
shove, not hard, but hard enough for him to fall down unconscious, clawing at the ground
with his hands by reflex; he still did not avoid being hit; the rod still found him on the floor;
the tip of the rod swang regularly up and down while he rolled to and fro under its blows.
And now one of the servitors appeared in the distance, with another a few steps behind him.
K. had quickly thrown the door shut, gone over to one of the windows overlooking the yard
and opened it. The screams had completely stopped. So that the servitor wouldn't come in, he
40
called out, "It's only me!" "Good evening, chief clerk," somebody called back. "Is there
anything wrong?" "No, no," answered K., "it's only a dog yelping in the yard." There was no
sound from the servitors so he added, "You can go back to what you were doing." He did not
want to become involved with a conversation with them, and so he leant out of the window.
A little while later, when he looked out in the corridor, they had already gone. Now, K.
remained at the window, he did not dare go back into the junk room, and he did not want to
go home either. The yard he looked down into was small and rectangular, all around it were
offices, all the windows were now dark and only those at the very top caught a reflection of
the moon. K. tried hard to see into the darkness of one corner of the yard, where a few
handcarts had been left behind one another. He felt anguish at not having been able to prevent
the flogging, but that was not his fault, if Franz had not screamed like that—clearly it must
have caused a great deal of pain but it's important to maintain control of oneself at important
moments—if Franz had not screamed then it was at least highly probable that K. would have
been able to dissuade the whip-man. If all the junior officers were contemptible why would
the whip-man, whose position was the most inhumane of all, be any exception, and K. had
noticed very clearly how his eyes had lit up when he saw the banknotes, he had obviously
only seemed serious about the flogging to raise the level of the bribe a little. And K. had not
been ungenerous, he really had wanted to get the policemen freed; if he really had now begun
to do something against the degeneracy of the court then it was a matter of course that he
would have to do something here as well. But of course, it became impossible for him to do
anything as soon as Franz started screaming. K. could not possibly have let the junior bank
staff, and perhaps even all sorts of other people, come along and catch him by surprise as he
haggled with those people in the junk room. Nobody could really expect that sort of sacrifice
of him. If that had been his intention then it would almost have been easier, K. would have
taken his own clothes off and offered himself to the whip-man in the policemen's place. The
whip-man would certainly not have accepted this substitution anyway, as in that way he
would have seriously violated his duty without gaining any benefit. He would most likely
have violated his duty twice over, as court employees were probably under orders not to
cause any harm to K. while he was facing charges, although there may have been special
conditions in force here. However things stood, K. was able to do no more than throw the
door shut, even though that would still do nothing to remove all the dangers he faced. It was
regrettable that he had given Franz a shove, and it could only be excused by the heat of the
moment.
In the distance, he heard the steps of the servitors; he did not want them to be too aware of his
presence, so he closed the window and walked towards the main staircase. At the door of the
junk room he stopped and listened for a little while. All was silent. The two policemen were
entirely at the whip-man's mercy; he could have beaten them to death. K. reached his hand
out for the door handle but drew it suddenly back. He was no longer in any position to help
anyone, and the servitors would soon be back; he did, though, promise himself that he would
raise the matter again with somebody and see that, as far as it was in his power, those who
really were guilty, the high officials whom nobody had so far dared point out to him, received
their due punishment. As he went down the main stairway at the front of the bank, he looked
carefully round at everyone who was passing, but there was no girl to be seen who might
have been waiting for somebody, not even within some distance from the bank. Franz's claim
that his bride was waiting for him was thus shown to be a lie, albeit one that was forgivable
and intended only to elicit more sympathy.
The policemen were still on K.'s mind all through the following day; he was unable to
concentrate on his work and had to stay in his office a little longer than the previous day so
that he could finish it. On the way home, as he passed by the junk room again, he opened its
41
door as if that had been his habit. Instead of the darkness he expected, he saw everything
unchanged from the previous evening, and did not know how he should respond. Everything
was exactly the same as he had seen it when he had opened the door the previous evening.
The forms and bottles of ink just inside the doorway, the whip-man with his cane, the two
policemen, still undressed, the candle on the shelf, and the two policemen began to wail and
call out "Mr. K.!" K. slammed the door immediately shut, and even thumped on it with his
fists as if that would shut it all the firmer. Almost in tears, he ran to the servitors working
quietly at the copying machine. "Go and get that junk room cleared out!" he shouted, and, in
amazement, they stopped what they were doing. "It should have been done long ago, we're
sinking in dirt!" They would be able to do the job the next day, K. nodded, it was too late in
the evening to make them do it there and then as he had originally intended. He sat down
briefly in order to keep them near him for a little longer, looked through a few of the copies
to give the impression that he was checking them and then, as he saw that they would not
dare to leave at the same time as himself, went home tired and with his mind numb.
42
Chapter VI
K.'s uncle—Leni
One afternoon—K. was very busy at the time, getting the post ready—K.'s Uncle Karl, a
small country land owner, came into the room, pushing his way between two of the staff who
were bringing in some papers. K. had long expected his uncle to appear, but the sight of him
now shocked K. far less than the prospect of it had done a long time before. His uncle was
bound to come, K. had been sure of that for about a month. He already thought at the time he
could see how his uncle would arrive, slightly bowed, his battered panama hat in his left
hand, his right hand already stretched out over the desk long before he was close enough as
he rushed carelessly towards K. knocking over everything that was in his way. K.'s uncle was
always in a hurry, as he suffered from the unfortunate belief that he had a number of things to
do while he was in the big city and had to settle all of them in one day—his visits were only
ever for one day—and at the same time thought he could not forgo any conversation or piece
of business or pleasure that might arise by chance. Uncle Karl was K.'s former guardian, and
so K. was duty-bound to help him in all of this as well as to offer him a bed for the night. "I'm
haunted by a ghost from the country," he would say.
As soon as they had greeted each other—K. had invited him to sit in the armchair but Uncle
Karl had no time for that—he said he wanted to speak briefly with K. in private. "It is
necessary," he said with a tired gulp, "it is necessary for my peace of mind." K. immediately
sent the junior staff from the room and told them to let no-one in. "What's this that I've been
hearing, Josef?" cried K.'s uncle when they were alone, as he sat on the table shoving various
papers under himself without looking at them to make himself more comfortable. K. said
nothing, he knew what was coming, but, suddenly relieved from the effort of the work he had
been doing, he gave way to a pleasant lassitude and looked out the window at the other side
of the street. From where he sat, he could see just a small, triangular section of it, part of the
empty walls of houses between two shop windows. "You're staring out the window!" called
out his uncle, raising his arms, "For God's sake, Josef, give me an answer! Is it true, can it
really be true?" "Uncle Karl," said K., wrenching himself back from his daydreaming, "I
really don't know what it is you want of me." "Josef," said his uncle in a warning tone, "as far
as I know, you've always told the truth. Am I to take what you've just said as a bad sign?" "I
think I know what it is you want," said K. obediently, "I expect you've heard about my trial."
"That's right," answered his uncle with a slow nod, "I've heard about your trial." "Who did
you hear it from, then?" asked K. "Erna wrote to me," said his uncle, "she doesn't have much
contact with you, it's true, you don't pay very much attention to her, I'm afraid to say, but she
learned about it nonetheless. I got her letter today and, of course, I came straight here. And
for no other reason, but it seems to me that this is reason enough. I can read you out the part
of the letter that concerns you." He drew the letter out from his wallet. "Here it is. She writes;
'I have not seen Josef for a long time, I was in the bank last week but Josef was so busy that
they would not let me through; I waited there for nearly an hour but then I had to go home as
I had my piano lesson. I would have liked to have spoken to him, maybe there will be a
chance another time. He sent me a big box of chocolates for my name-day, that was very nice
and attentive of him. I forgot to tell you about it when I wrote, and I only remember now that
you ask me about it. Chocolate, as I am sure you are aware, disappears straight away in this
lodging house, almost as soon as you know somebody has given you chocolate it is gone. But
there is something else I wanted to tell you about Josef. Like I said, they would not let me
through to see him at the bank because he was negotiating with some gentleman just then.
43
After I had been waiting quietly for quite a long time I asked one of the staff whether his
meeting would last much longer. He said it might well do, as it was probably about the legal
proceedings, he said, that were being conducted against him. I asked what sort of legal
proceedings it was that were being conducted against the chief clerk, and whether he was not
making some mistake, but he said he was not making any mistake, there were legal
proceedings underway and even that they were about something quite serious, but he did not
know any more about it. He would have liked to have been of some help to the chief clerk
himself, as the chief clerk was a gentleman, good and honest, but he did not know what it was
he could do and merely hoped there would be some influential gentlemen who would take his
side. I'm sure that is what will happen and that everything will turn out for the best in the end,
but in the mean time things do not look at all good, and you can see that from the mood of the
chief clerk himself. Of course, I did not place too much importance on this conversation, and
even did my best to put the bank clerk's mind at rest, he was quite a simple man. I told him he
was not to speak to anyone else about this, and I think it is all just a rumour, but I still think it
might be good if you, Dear Father, if you looked into the matter the next time you visit. It
will be easy for you to find out more detail and, if it is really necessary, to do something
about it through the great and influential people you know. But if it is not necessary, and that
is what seems most likely, then at least your daughter will soon have the chance to embrace
you and I look forward to it.'—She's a good child," said K.'s uncle when he had finished
reading, and wiped a few tears from his eyes. K. nodded. With all the different disruptions he
had had recently he had completely forgotten about Erna, even her birthday, and the story of
the chocolates had clearly just been invented so that he wouldn't get in trouble with his aunt
and uncle. It was very touching, and even the theatre tickets, which he would regularly send
her from then on, would not be enough to repay her, but he really did not feel, now, that it
was right for him to visit her in her lodgings and hold conversations with a little, eighteen
year old schoolgirl. "And what do you have to say about that?" asked his uncle, who had
forgotten all his rush and excitement as he read the letter, and seemed to be about to read it
again. "Yes, Uncle," said K., "it is true." "True!" called out his uncle. "What is true? How can
this be true? What sort of trial is it? Not a criminal trial, I hope?" "It's a criminal trial,"
answered K. "And you sit quietly here while you've got a criminal trial round your neck?"
shouted his uncle, getting ever louder. "The more calm I am, the better it will be for the
outcome," said K. in a tired voice, "don't worry." "How can I help worrying?!" shouted his
uncle, "Josef, my dear Josef, think about yourself, about your family, think about our good
name! Up till now, you've always been our pride, don't now become our disgrace. I don't like
the way you're behaving," he said, looking at K. with his head at an angle, "that's not how an
innocent man behaves when he's accused of something, not if he's still got any strength in
him. Just tell me what it's all about so that I can help you. It's something to do with the bank,
I take it?" "No," said K. as he stood up, "and you're speaking too loud, Uncle, I expect one of
the staff is listening at the door and I find that rather unpleasant. It's best if we go somewhere
else, then I can answer all your questions, as far as I can. And I know very well that I have to
account to the family for what I do." "You certainly do!" his uncle shouted, "Quite right, you
do. Now just get a move on, Josef, hurry up now!" "I still have a few documents I need to
prepare," said K., and, using the intercom, he summoned his deputy who entered a few
moments later. K.'s uncle, still angry and excited, gestured with his hand to show that K. had
summoned him, even though there was no need whatever to do so. K. stood in front of the
desk and explained to the young man, who listened calm and attentive, what would need to be
done that day in his absence, speaking in a calm voice and making use of various documents.
The presence of K.'s uncle while this was going on was quite disturbing; he did not listen to
what was being said, but at first he stood there with eyes wide open and nervously biting his
lips. Then he began to walk up and down the room, stopped now and then at the window, or
44
stood in front of a picture always making various exclamations such as, "That is totally
incomprehensible to me!" or "Now just tell me, what are you supposed to make of that?" The
young man pretended to notice nothing of this and listened to K.'s instructions through to the
end, he made a few notes, bowed to both K. and his uncle and then left the room. K.'s uncle
had turned his back to him and was looking out the window, bunching up the curtains with
his outstretched hands. The door had hardly closed when he called out, "At last! Now that
he's stopped jumping about we can go too!" Once they were in the front hall of the bank,
where several members of staff were standing about and where, just then, the deputy director
was walking across, there was unfortunately no way of stopping K.'s uncle from continually
asking questions about the trial. "Now then, Josef," he began, lightly acknowledging the
bows from those around them as they passed, "tell me everything about this trial; what sort of
trial is it?" K. made a few comments which conveyed little information, even laughed a little,
and it was only when they reached the front steps that he explained to his uncle that he had
not wanted to talk openly in front of those people. "Quite right," said his uncle, "but now start
talking." With his head to one side, and smoking his cigar in short, impatient draughts, he
listened. "First of all, Uncle," said K., "it's not a trial like you'd have in a normal courtroom."
"So much the worse," said his uncle. "How's that?" asked K., looking at him. "What I mean
is, that's for the worse," he repeated. They were standing on the front steps of the bank; as the
doorkeeper seemed to be listening to what they were saying K. drew his uncle down further,
where they were absorbed into the bustle of the street. His uncle took K.'s arm and stopped
asking questions with such urgency about the trial, they walked on for a while in silence.
"But how did all this come about?" he eventually asked, stopping abruptly enough to startle
the people walking behind, who had to avoid walking into him. "Things like this don't come
all of a sudden, they start developing a long time beforehand, there must have been warning
signs of it, why didn't you write to me? You know I'd do anything for you, to some extent I
am still your guardian, and until today that's something I was proud of. I'll still help you, of
course I will, only now, now that the trial is already underway, it makes it very difficult. But
whatever; the best thing now is for you to take a short holiday staying with us in the country.
You've lost weight, I can see that now. The country life will give you strength, that will be
good, there's bound to be a lot of hard work ahead of you. But besides that it'll be a way of
getting you away from the court, to some extent. Here they've got every means of showing
the powers at their disposal and they're automatically bound to use them against you; in the
country they'll either have to delegate authority to different bodies or just have to try and
bother you by letter, telegram or telephone. And that's bound to weaken the effect, it won't
release you from them but it'll give you room to breathe." "You could forbid me to leave,"
said K., who had been drawn slightly into his uncle's way of thinking by what he had been
saying. "I didn't think you would do it," said his uncle thoughtfully, "you won't suffer too
much loss of power by moving away." K. grasped his uncle under the arm to prevent him
stopping still and said, "I thought you'd think all this is less important than I do, and now
you're taking it so hard." "Josef," called his uncle trying to disentangle himself from him so
that he could stop walking, but K. did not let go, "you've completely changed, you used to be
so astute, are you losing it now? Do you want to lose the trial? Do you realise what that
would mean? That would mean you would be simply destroyed. And that everyone you know
would be pulled down with you or at the very least humiliated, disgraced right down to the
ground. Josef, pull yourself together. The way you're so indifferent about it, it's driving me
mad. Looking at you I can almost believe that old saying: 'Having a trial like that means
losing a trial like that'." "My dear Uncle," said K., "it won't do any good to get excited, it's no
good for you to do it and it'd be no good for me to do it. The case won't be won by getting
excited, and please admit that my practical experience counts for something, just as I have
always and still do respect your experience, even when it surprises me. You say that the
45
family will also be affected by this trial; I really can't see how, but that's beside the point and
I'm quite willing to follow your instructions in all of this. Only, I don't see any advantage in
staying in the country, not even for you, as that would indicate flight and a sense of guilt.
And besides, although I am more subject to persecution if I stay in the city I can also press
the matter forward better here." "You're right," said his uncle in a tone that seemed to indicate
they were finally coming closer to each other, "I just made the suggestion because, as I saw
it, if you stay in the city the case will be put in danger by your indifference to it, and I thought
it was better if I did the work for you. But will you push things forward yourself with all your
strength, if so, that will naturally be far better." "We're agreed then," said K. "And do you
have any suggestions for what I should do next?" "Well, naturally I'll have to think about it,"
said his uncle, "you must bear in mind that I've been living in the country for twenty years
now, almost without a break, you lose your ability to deal with matters like this. But I do
have some important connections with several people who, I expect, know their way around
these things better than I do, and to contact them is a matter of course. Out there in the
country I've been getting out of condition, I'm sure you're already aware of that. It's only at
times like this that you notice it yourself. And this affair of yours came largely unexpected,
although, oddly enough, I had expected something of the sort after I'd read Erna's letter, and
today when I saw your face I knew it with almost total certainty. But all that is by the by, the
important thing now is, we have no time to lose." Even while he was still speaking, K.'s uncle
had stood on tiptoe to summon a taxi and now he pulled K. into the car behind himself as he
called out an address to the driver. "We're going now to see Dr. Huld, the lawyer," he said,
"we were at school together. I'm sure you know the name, don't you? No? Well that is odd.
He's got a very good reputation as a defence barrister and for working with the poor. But I
esteem him especially as someone you can trust." "It's alright with me, whatever you do,"
said K., although he was made uneasy by the rushed and urgent way his uncle was dealing
with the matter. It was not very encouraging, as the accused, to be taken to a lawyer for poor
people. "I didn't know," he said, "that you could take on a lawyer in matters like this." "Well
of course you can," said his uncle, "that goes without saying. Why wouldn't you take on a
lawyer? And now, so that I'm properly instructed in this matter, tell me what's been
happening so far." K. instantly began telling his uncle about what had been happening,
holding nothing back—being completely open with him was the only way that K. could
protest at his uncle's belief that the trial was a great disgrace. He mentioned Miss Bürstner's
name just once and in passing, but that did nothing to diminish his openness about the trial as
Miss Bürstner had no connection with it. As he spoke, he looked out the window and saw
how, just then, they were getting closer to the suburb where the court offices were. He drew
this to his uncle's attention, but he did not find the coincidence especially remarkable. The
taxi stopped in front of a dark building. K.'s uncle knocked at the very first door at ground
level; while they waited he smiled, showing his big teeth, and whispered, "Eight o'clock; not
the usual sort of time to be visiting a lawyer, but Huld won't mind it from me." Two large,
black eyes appeared in the spy-hatch in the door, they stared at the two visitors for a while
and then disappeared; the door, however, did not open. K. and his uncle confirmed to each
other the fact that they had seen the two eyes. "A new maid, afraid of strangers," said K.'s
uncle, and knocked again. The eyes appeared once more. This time they seemed almost sad,
but the open gas flame that burned with a hiss close above their heads gave off little light and
that may have merely created an illusion. "Open the door," called K.'s uncle, raising his fist
against it, "we are friends of Dr. Huld, the lawyer!" "Dr. Huld is ill," whispered someone
behind them. In a doorway at the far end of a narrow passage stood a man in his dressing
gown, giving them this information in an extremely quiet voice. K.'s uncle, who had already
been made very angry by the long wait, turned abruptly round and retorted, "Ill. You say he's
ill?" and strode towards the gentleman in a way that seemed almost threatening, as if he were
46
the illness himself. "They've opened the door for you, now," said the gentleman, pointing at
the door of the lawyer. He pulled his dressing gown together and disappeared. The door had
indeed been opened, a young girl—K. recognised the dark, slightly bulging eyes—stood in
the hallway in a long white apron, holding a candle in her hand. "Next time, open up sooner!"
said K.'s uncle instead of a greeting, while the girl made a slight curtsey. "Come along,
Josef," he then said to K. who was slowly moving over towards the girl. "Dr. Huld is unwell,"
said the girl as K.'s uncle, without stopping, rushed towards one of the doors. K. continued to
look at the girl in amazement as she turned round to block the way into the living room, she
had a round face like a puppy's, not only the pale cheeks and the chin were round but the
temples and the hairline were too. "Josef!" called his uncle once more, and he asked the girl,
"It's trouble with his heart, is it?" "I think it is, sir," said the girl, who by now had found time
to go ahead with the candle and open the door into the room. In one corner of the room,
where the light of the candle did not reach, a face with a long beard looked up from the bed.
"Leni, who's this coming in?" asked the lawyer, unable to recognise his guests because he
was dazzled by the candle. "It's your old friend, Albert," said K.'s uncle. "Oh, Albert," said
the lawyer, falling back onto his pillow as if this visit meant he would not need to keep up
appearances. "Is it really as bad as that?" asked K.'s uncle, sitting on the edge of the bed. "I
don't believe it is. It's a recurrence of your heart trouble and it'll pass over like the other
times." "Maybe," said the lawyer quietly, "but it's just as much trouble as it's ever been. I can
hardly breathe, I can't sleep at all and I'm getting weaker by the day." "I see," said K.'s uncle,
pressing his panama hat firmly against his knee with his big hand. "That is bad news. But are
you getting the right sort of care? And it's so depressing in here, it's so dark. It's a long time
since I was last here, but it seemed to me friendlier then. Even your young lady here doesn't
seem to have much life in her, unless she's just pretending." The maid was still standing by
the door with the candle; as far as could be made out, she was watching K. more than she was
watching his uncle even while the latter was still speaking about her. K. leant against a chair
that he had pushed near to the girl. "When you're as ill as I am," said the lawyer, "you need to
have peace. I don't find it depressing." After a short pause he added, "and Leni looks after me
well, she's a good girl." But that was not enough to persuade K.'s uncle, he had visibly taken
against his friend's carer and, even though he did not contradict the invalid, he persecuted her
with his scowl as she went over to the bed, put the candle on the bedside table and, leaning
over the bed, made a fuss of him by tidying the pillows. K.'s uncle nearly forgot the need to
show any consideration for the man who lay ill in bed, he stood up, walked up and down
behind the carer, and K. would not have been surprised if he had grabbed hold of her skirts
behind her and dragged her away from the bed. K. himself looked on calmly, he was not even
disappointed at finding the lawyer unwell, he had been able to do nothing to oppose the
enthusiasm his uncle had developed for the matter, he was glad that this enthusiasm had now
been distracted without his having to do anything about it. His uncle, probably simply
wishing to be offensive to the lawyer's attendant, then said, "Young lady, now please leave us
alone for a while, I have some personal matters to discuss with my friend." Dr. Huld's carer
was still leant far over the invalid's bed and smoothing out the cloth covering the wall next to
it, she merely turned her head and then, in striking contrast with the anger that first stopped
K.'s uncle from speaking and then let the words out in a gush, she said very quietly, "You can
see that Dr. Huld is so ill that he can't discuss any matters at all." It was probably just for the
sake of convenience that she had repeated the words spoken by K.'s uncle, but an onlooker
might even have perceived it as mocking him and he, of course, jumped up as if he had just
been stabbed. "You damned ...," in the first gurglings of his excitement his words could
hardly be understood, K. was startled even though he had been expecting something of the
sort and ran to his uncle with the intention, no doubt, of closing his mouth with both his
hands. Fortunately, though, behind the girl, the invalid raised himself up, K.'s uncle made an
47
ugly face as if swallowing something disgusting and then, somewhat calmer, said, "We have
naturally not lost our senses, not yet; if what I am asking for were not possible I would not be
asking for it. Now please, go!" The carer stood up straight by the bed directly facing K.'s
uncle, K. thought he noticed that with one hand she was stroking the lawyer's hand. "You can
say anything in front of Leni," said the invalid, in a tone that was unmistakably imploring.
"It's not my business," said K.'s uncle, "and it's not my secrets." And he twisted himself round
as if wanting to go into no more negotiations but giving himself a little more time to think.
"Whose business is it then?" asked the lawyer in an exhausted voice as he leant back again.
"My nephew's," said K.'s uncle, "and I've brought him along with me." And he introduced
him, "Chief Clerk Josef K." "Oh!" said the invalid, now with much more life in him, and
reached out his hand towards K. "Do forgive me, I didn't notice you there at all." Then he
then said to his carer, "Leni, go," stretching his hand out to her as if this were a farewell that
would have to last for a long time. This time the girl offered no resistance. "So you," he
finally said to K.'s uncle, who had also calmed down and stepped closer, "you haven't come
to visit me because I'm ill but you've come on business." The lawyer now looked so much
stronger that it seemed the idea of being visited because he was ill had somehow made him
weak, he remained supporting himself on one elbow, which must have been rather tiring, and
continually pulled at a lock of hair in the middle of his beard. "You already look much
better," said K.'s uncle, "now that that witch has gone outside." He interrupted himself,
whispered, "I bet you she's listening!" and sprang over to the door. But behind the door there
was no-one, K.'s uncle came back not disappointed, as her not listening seemed to him worse
than if she had been, but probably somewhat embittered. "You're mistaken about her," said
the lawyer, but did nothing more to defend her; perhaps that was his way of indicating that
she did not need defending. But in a tone that was much more committed he went on, "As far
as your nephew's affairs are concerned, this will be an extremely difficult undertaking and I'd
count myself lucky if my strength lasted out long enough for it; I'm greatly afraid it won't do,
but anyway I don't want to leave anything untried; if I don't last out you can always get
somebody else. To be honest, this matter interests me too much, and I can't bring myself to
give up the chance of taking some part in it. If my heart does totally give out then at least it
will have found a worthy affair to fail in." K. believed he understood not a word of this entire
speech, he looked at his uncle for an explanation but his uncle sat on the bedside table with
the candle in his hand, a medicine bottle had rolled off the table onto the floor, he nodded to
everything the lawyer said, agreed to everything, and now and then looked at K. urging him
to show the same compliance. Maybe K.'s uncle had already told the lawyer about the trial.
But that was impossible, everything that had happened so far spoke against it. So he said, "I
don't understand...." "Well, maybe I've misunderstood what you've been saying," said the
lawyer, just as astonished and embarrassed as K. "Perhaps I've been going too fast. What was
it you wanted to speak to me about? I thought it was to do with your trial." "Of course it is,"
said K.'s uncle, who then asked K., "So what is it you want?" "Yes, but how is it that you
know anything about me and my case?" asked K. "Oh, I see," said the lawyer with a smile. "I
am a lawyer, I move in court circles, people talk about various different cases and the more
interesting ones stay in your mind, especially when they concern the nephew of a friend.
There's nothing very remarkable about that." "What is it you want, then?" asked K.'s uncle
once more, "You seem so uneasy about it." "You move in this court's circles?" asked K.
"Yes," said the lawyer. "You're asking questions like a child," said K.'s uncle. "What circles
should I move in, then, if not with members of my own discipline?" the lawyer added. It
sounded so indisputable that K. gave no answer at all. "But you work in the High Court, not
that court in the attic," he had wanted to say but could not bring himself to actually utter it.
"You have to realise," the lawyer continued, in a tone as if he were explaining something
obvious, unnecessary and incidental, "you have to realise that I also derive great advantage
48
for my clients from mixing with those people, and do so in many different ways, it's not
something you can keep talking about all the time. I'm at a bit of a disadvantage now, of
course, because of my illness, but I still get visits from some good friends of mine at the court
and I learn one or two things. It might even be that I learn more than many of those who are
in the best of health and spend all day in court. And I'm receiving a very welcome visit right
now, for instance." And he pointed into a dark corner of the room. "Where?" asked K., almost
uncouth in his surprise. He looked round uneasily; the little candle gave off far too little light
to reach as far as the wall opposite. And then, something did indeed begin to move there in
the corner. In the light of the candle held up by K.'s uncle an elderly gentleman could be seen
sitting beside a small table. He had been sitting there for so long without being noticed that he
could hardly have been breathing. Now he stood up with a great deal of fuss, clearly unhappy
that attention had been drawn to him. It was as if, by flapping his hands about like short
wings, he hoped to deflect any introductions and greetings, as if he wanted on no account to
disturb the others by his presence and seemed to be exhorting them to leave him back in the
dark and forget about his being there. That, however, was something that could no longer be
granted him. "You took us by surprise, you see," said the lawyer in explanation, cheerfully
indicating to the gentleman that he should come closer, which, slowly, hesitatingly, looking
all around him, but with a certain dignity, he did. "The office director—oh, yes, forgive me, I
haven't introduced you—this is my friend Albert K., this is his nephew, the chief clerk Josef
K., and this is the office director—so, the office director was kind enough to pay me a visit.
It's only possible to appreciate just how valuable a visit like this is if you've been let into the
secret of what a pile of work the office director has heaped over him. Well, he came anyway,
we were having a peaceful chat, as far as I was able when I'm so weak, and although we
hadn't told Leni she mustn't let anyone in as we weren't expecting anyone, we still would
rather have remained alone, but then along came you, Albert, thumping your fists on the
door, the office director moved over into the corner pulling his table and chair with him, but
now it turns out we might have, that is, if that's what you wish, we might have something to
discuss with each other and it would be good if we can all come back together again.—Office
director ...," he said with his head on one side, pointing with a humble smile to an armchair
near the bed. "I'm afraid I'll only be able to stay a few minutes more," smiled the office
director as he spread himself out in the armchair and looked at the clock. "Business calls. But
I wouldn't want to miss the chance of meeting a friend of my friend." He inclined his head
slightly toward K.'s uncle, who seemed very happy with his new acquaintance, but he was not
the sort of person to express his feelings of deference and responded to the office director's
words with embarrassed, but loud, laughter. A horrible sight! K. was able to quietly watch
everything as nobody paid any attention to him, the office director took over as leader of the
conversation as seemed to be his habit once he had been called forward, the lawyer listened
attentively with his hand to his ear, his initial weakness having perhaps only had the function
of driving away his new visitors. K.'s uncle served as candle-bearer—balancing the candle on
his thigh while the office director frequently glanced nervously at it—and was soon free of
his embarrassment and was quickly enchanted not only by the office director's speaking
manner but also by the gentle, waving hand-movements with which he accompanied it. K.,
leaning against the bedpost, was totally ignored by the office director, perhaps deliberately,
and served the old man only as audience. And besides, he had hardly any idea what the
conversation was about and his thoughts soon turned to the care assistant and the ill treatment
she had suffered from his uncle. Soon after, he began to wonder whether he had not seen the
office director somewhere before, perhaps among the people who were at his first hearing. He
may have been mistaken, but thought the office director might well have been among the old
gentlemen with the thin beards in the first row.
49
There was then a noise that everyone heard from the hallway as if something of porcelain
were being broken. "I'll go and see what's happened," said K., who slowly left the room as if
giving the others the chance to stop him. He had hardly stepped into the hallway, finding his
bearings in the darkness with his hand still firmly holding the door, when another small hand,
much smaller than K.'s own, placed itself on his and gently shut the door. It was the carer
who had been waiting there. "Nothing has happened," she whispered to him, "I just threw a
plate against the wall to get you out of there." "I was thinking about you, as well," replied K.
uneasily. "So much the better," said the carer. "Come with me." A few steps along, they came
to a frosted glass door which the carer opened for him. "Come in here," she said. It was
clearly the lawyer's office, fitted out with old, heavy furniture, as far as could be seen in the
moonlight which now illuminated just a small, rectangular section of the floor by each of the
three big windows. "This way," said the carer, pointing to a dark trunk with a carved, wooden
backrest. When he had sat down, K. continued to look round the room, it was a large room
with a high ceiling, the clients of this lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it. K.
thought he could see the little steps with which visitors would approach the massive desk. But
then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only for the carer who sat very close beside him,
almost pressing him against the armrest. "I did think," she said, "you would come out here to
me by yourself without me having to call you first. It was odd. First you stare at me as soon
as you come in, and then you keep me waiting. And you ought to call me Leni, too," she
added quickly and suddenly, as if no moment of this conversation should be lost. "Gladly,"
said K. "But as for its being odd, Leni, that's easy to explain. Firstly, I had to listen to what
the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a good reason, but secondly I'm not a
bold person, if anything I'm quite shy, and you, Leni, you didn't really look like you could be
won over in one stroke, either." "That's not it," said Leni, laying one arm on the armrest and
looking at K., "you didn't like me, and I don't suppose you like me now, either." "Liking
wouldn't be very much," said K., evasively. "Oh!" she exclaimed with a smile, thus making
use of K.'s comment to gain an advantage over him. So K. remained silent for a while. By
now, he had become used to the darkness in the room and was able to make out various
fixtures and fittings. He was especially impressed by a large picture hanging to the right of
the door, he leant forward in order to see it better. It depicted a man wearing a judge's robes;
he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forth from the picture. The odd
thing about the picture was that this judge was not sitting there in dignified calm but had his
left arm pressed against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely free
and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up any moment in vigorous
outrage and make some decisive comment or even to pass sentence. The accused was
probably meant to be imagined at the foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in
the picture, covered with a yellow carpet. "That might be my judge," said K., pointing to the
picture with one finger. "I know him," said Leni looking up at the picture, "he comes here
quite often. That picture is from when he was young, but he can never have looked anything
like it, as he's tiny, minute almost. But despite that, he had himself made to look bigger in the
picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round here. But even I'm vain and that makes
me very unhappy that you don't like me." K. replied to that last comment merely by
embracing Leni and drawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder. To
the rest of it, though, he said, "What rank is he?" "He's an examining judge," she said, taking
hold of the hand with which K. held her and playing with his fingers. "Just an examining
judge once again," said K. in disappointment, "the senior officials keep themselves hidden.
But here he is sitting on a throne." "That's all just made up," said Leni with her face bent over
K.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen chair with an old horse blanket folded over it. But
do you have to be always thinking about your trial?" she added slowly. "No, not at all," said
K., "I probably even think too little about it." "That's not the mistake you're making," said
50
Leni, "you're too unyielding, that's what I've heard." "Who said that?" asked K., he felt her
body against his chest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair. "I'd be saying
too much if I told you that," answered Leni. "Please don't ask for names, but do stop making
these mistakes of yours, stop being so unyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend
yourself from this court, you have to confess. So confess to them as soon as you get the
chance. It's only then that they give you the chance to get away, not till then. Only, without
help from outside even that's impossible, but you needn't worry about getting this help as I
want to help you myself." "You understand a lot about this court and what sort of tricks are
needed," said K. as he lifted her, since she was pressing in much too close to him, onto his
lap. "That's alright, then," she said, and made herself comfortable on his lap by smoothing out
her skirt and adjusting her blouse. Then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back
and took a long look at him. "And what if I don't confess, could you not help me then?" asked
K. to test her out. I'm accumulating women to help me, he thought to himself almost in
amazement, first Miss Bürstner, then the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant
who seems to have some incomprehensible need for me. The way she sits on my lap as if it
were her proper place! "No," answered Leni, slowly shaking her head, "I couldn't help you
then. But you don't want my help anyway, it means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and
won't be persuaded." Then, after a while she asked, "Do you have a lover?" "No," said K.
"Oh, you must have," she said. "Well, I have really," said K. "Just think, I've even betrayed
her while I'm carrying her photograph with me." Leni insisted he show her a photograph of
Elsa, and then, hunched on his lap, studied the picture closely. The photograph was not one
that had been taken while Elsa was posing for it, it showed her just after she had been in a
wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars, her skirt was still flung out as she span round,
she had placed her hands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one side
with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was intended for. "She's
very tightly laced," said Leni, pointing to the place where she thought this could be seen. "I
don't like her, she's clumsy and crude. But maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you, that's
the impression you get from the picture. Big, strong girls like that often don't know how to be
anything but gentle and friendly. Would she be capable of sacrificing herself for you,
though?" "No," said K., "she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of
sacrificing herself for me. But I've never yet asked any of those things of her. I've never
looked at this picture as closely as you." "You can't think much of her, then," said Leni. "She
can't be your lover after all." "Yes she is," said K., "I'm not going to take my word back on
that." "Well she might be your lover now, then," said Leni, "but you wouldn't miss her much
if you lost her or if you exchanged her for somebody else, me for instance." "That is certainly
conceivable," said K. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, she
knows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think about it. She wouldn't
try to persuade me to be less unyielding." "Well that's no advantage," said Leni. "If she's got
no advantage other than that, I can keep on hoping. Has she got any bodily defects?" "'Bodily
defects'?" asked K. "Yeah," said Leni, "as I do have a bodily defect, just a little one. Look."
She spread the middle and ring fingers of her right hand apart from each other. Between those
fingers the flap of skin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of the little
finger. In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it was she wanted to show him, so she led
his hand to it so that he could feel. "What a freak of nature," said K., and when he had taken a
look at the whole hand he added, "What a pretty claw!" Leni looked on with a kind of pride
as K. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers in amazement, until, finally, he briefly
kissed them and let go. "Oh!" she immediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!" Hurriedly, and
with her mouth open, she clambered up K.'s lap with her knees. He was almost aghast as he
looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a bitter, irritating smell from her,
like pepper, she grasped his head, leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting
51
into his hair. "I've taken her place!" she exclaimed from time to time. "Just look, now you've
taken me instead of her!" Just then, her knee slipped out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell
down onto the carpet, K. tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled
down with her. "Now you're mine," she said. Her last words to him as he left were, "Here's
the key to the door, come whenever you want," and she planted an undirected kiss on his
back. When he stepped out the front door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to
the middle of the street to see if he could still glimpse Leni at the window when K.'s uncle
leapt out of a car that K., thinking of other things, had not seen waiting outside the building.
He took hold of K. by both arms and shoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him
to it. "Young man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?! Things were going well
with this business of yours, now you've caused it terrible damage. You slip off with some
dirty, little thing who, moreover, is obviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours.
You don't even try to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite open about it,
you run off with her and stay there. And meanwhile we're sitting there, your uncle who's
going to such effort for you, the lawyer who needs to be won over to your side, and above all
the office director, a very important gentleman who is in direct command of your affair in its
present stage. We wanted to discuss how best to help you, I had to handle the lawyer very
carefully, he had to handle the office director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at
least give me some support. Instead of which you stay away. Eventually we couldn't keep up
the pretence any longer, but these are polite and highly capable men, they didn't say anything
about it so as to spare my feelings but in the end not even they could continue to force
themselves and, as they couldn't speak about the matter in hand, they became silent. We sat
there for several minutes, listening to see whether you wouldn't finally come back. All in
vain. In the end the office director stood up, as he had stayed far longer than he had originally
intended, made his farewell, looked at me in sympathy without being able to help, he waited
at the door for a long time although it's more than I can understand why he was being so
good, and then he went. I, of course, was glad he'd gone, I'd been holding my breath all this
time. All this had even more effect on the lawyer lying there ill, when I took my leave of him,
the good man, he was quite unable to speak. You have probably contributed to his total
collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependent on closer to his death. And me,
your own uncle, you leave me here in the rain—just feel this, I'm wet right through—waiting
here for hours, sick with worry."
52
Chapter VII
Lawyer—Manufacturer—Painter
One winter morning—snow was falling in the dull light outside—K. was sitting in his office,
already extremely tired despite the early hour. He had told the servitor he was engaged in a
major piece of work and none of the junior staff should be allowed in to see him, so he would
not be disturbed by them at least. But instead of working he turned round in his chair, slowly
moved various items around his desk, but then, without being aware of it, he lay his arm
stretched out on the desk top and sat there immobile with his head sunk down on his chest.
He was no longer able to get the thought of the trial out of his head. He had often wondered
whether it might not be a good idea to work out a written defence and hand it in to the court.
It would contain a short description of his life and explain why he had acted the way he had
at each event that was in any way important, whether he now considered he had acted well or
ill, and his reasons for each. There was no doubt of the advantages a written defence of this
sort would have over relying on the lawyer, who was anyway not without his shortcomings.
K. had no idea what actions the lawyer was taking; it was certainly not a lot, it was more than
a month since the lawyer had summoned him, and none of the previous discussions had given
K. the impression that this man would be able to do much for him. Most importantly, he had
asked him hardly any questions. And there were so many questions here to be asked. Asking
questions was the most important thing. K. had the feeling that he would be able to ask all the
questions needed here himself. The lawyer, in contrast, did not ask questions but did all the
talking himself or sat silently facing him, leant forward slightly over the desk, probably
because he was hard of hearing, pulled on a strand of hair in the middle of his beard and
looked down at the carpet, perhaps at the very spot where K. had lain with Leni. Now and
then he would give K. some vague warning of the sort you give to children. His speeches
were as pointless as they were boring, and K. decided that when the final bill came he would
pay not a penny for them. Once the lawyer thought he had humiliated K. sufficiently, he
usually started something that would raise his spirits again. He had already, he would then
say, won many such cases, partly or in whole, cases which may not really have been as
difficult as this one but which, on the face of it, had even less hope of success. He had a list
of these cases here in the drawer—here he would tap on one or other of the drawers in his
desk—but could, unfortunately, not show them to K. as they dealt with official secrets.
Nonetheless, the great experience he had acquired through all these cases would, of course,
be of benefit to K. He had, of course, begun work straight away and was nearly ready to
submit the first documents. They would be very important because the first impression made
by the defence will often determine the whole course of the proceedings. Unfortunately,
though, he would still have to make it clear to K. that the first documents submitted are
sometimes not even read by the court. They simply put them with the other documents and
point out that, for the time being, questioning and observing the accused are much more
important than anything written. If the applicant becomes insistent, then they add that before
they come to any decision, as soon as all the material has been brought together, with due
regard, of course, to all the documents, then these first documents to have been submitted will
also be checked over. But unfortunately, even this is not usually true, the first documents
submitted are usually mislaid or lost completely, and even if they do keep them right to the
end they are hardly read, although the lawyer only knew about this from rumour. This is all
very regrettable, but not entirely without its justifications. But K. should not forget that the
trial would not be public, if the court deems it necessary it can be made public but there is no
53
law that says it has to be. As a result, the accused and his defence don't have access even to
the court records, and especially not to the indictment, and that means we generally don't
know—or at least not precisely—what the first documents need to be about, which means
that if they do contain anything of relevance to the case it's only by a lucky coincidence. If
anything about the individual charges and the reasons for them comes out clearly or can be
guessed at while the accused is being questioned, then it's possible to work out and submit
documents that really direct the issue and present proof, but not before. Conditions like this,
of course, place the defence in a very unfavourable and difficult position. But that is what
they intend. In fact, defence is not really allowed under the law, it's only tolerated, and there
is even some dispute about whether the relevant parts of the law imply even that. So strictly
speaking, there is no such thing as a counsel acknowledged by the court, and anyone who
comes before this court as counsel is basically no more than a barrack room lawyer. The
effect of all this, of course, is to remove the dignity of the whole procedure, the next time K.
is in the court offices he might like to have a look in at the lawyers' room, just so that he's
seen it. He might well be quite shocked by the people he sees assembled there. The room
they've been allocated, with its narrow space and low ceiling, will be enough to show what
contempt the court has for these people. The only light in the room comes through a little
window that is so high up that, if you want to look out of it, you first have to get one of your
colleagues to support you on his back, and even then the smoke from the chimney just in
front of it will go up your nose and make your face black. In the floor of this room—to give
yet another example of the conditions there—there is a hole that's been there for more than a
year, it's not so big that a man could fall through, but it is big enough for your foot to
disappear through it. The lawyers' room is on the second floor of the attic; if your foot does
go through it will hang down into the first floor of the attic underneath it, and right in the
corridor where the litigants are waiting. It's no exaggeration when lawyers say that conditions
like that are a disgrace. Complaints to the management don't have the slightest effect, but the
lawyers are strictly forbidden to alter anything in the room at their own expense. But even
treating the lawyers in this way has its reasons. They want, as far as possible, to prevent any
kind of defence, everything should be made the responsibility of the accused. Not a bad point
of view, basically, but nothing could be more mistaken than to think from that that lawyers
are not necessary for the accused in this court. On the contrary, there is no court where they
are less needed than here. This is because proceedings are generally kept secret not only from
the public but also from the accused. Only as far as that is possible, of course, but it is
possible to a very large extent. And the accused doesn't get to see the court records either, and
it's very difficult to infer what's in the court records from what's been said during questioning
based on them, especially for the accused who is in a difficult situation and is faced with
every possible worry to distract him. This is when the defence begins. Counsel for the
defence are not normally allowed to be present while the accused is being questioned, so
afterwards, and if possible still at the door of the interview room, he has to learn what he can
about it from him and extract whatever he can that might be of use, even though what the
accused has to report is often very confused. But that is not the most important thing, as
there's really not a lot that can be learned in this way, although in this, as with anything else,
a competent man will learn more than another. Nonetheless, the most important thing is the
lawyer's personal connections, that's where the real value of taking counsel lies. Now K. will
most likely have already learned from his own experience that, among its very lowest orders,
the court organisation does have its imperfections, the court is strictly closed to the public,
but staff who forget their duty or who take bribes do, to some extent, show where the gaps
are. This is where most lawyers will push their way in, this is where bribes are paid and
information extracted, there have even, in earlier times at least, been incidents where
documents have been stolen. There's no denying that some surprisingly favourable results
54
have been attained for the accused in this way, for a limited time, and these petty advocates
then strut to and fro on the basis of them and attract new clients, but for the further course of
the proceedings it signifies either nothing or nothing good. The only things of real value are
honest personal contacts, contacts with higher officials, albeit higher officials of the lower
grades, you understand. That is the only way the progress of the trial can be influenced,
hardly noticeable at first, it's true, but from then on it becomes more and more visible. There
are, of course, not many lawyers who can do this, and K. has made a very good choice in this
matter. There were probably no more than one or two who had as many contacts as Dr. Huld,
but they don't bother with the company of the lawyers' room and have nothing to do with it.
This means they have all the less contact with the court officials. It is not at all necessary for
Dr. Huld to go to the court, wait in the ante-rooms for the examining judges to turn up, if they
turn up, and try to achieve something which, according to the judges' mood is usually more
apparent than real and most often not even that. No, K. has seen for himself that the court
officials, including some who are quite high up, come forward without being asked, are glad
to give information which is fully open or at least easy to understand, they discuss the next
stages in the proceedings, in fact in some cases they can be won over and are quite willing to
adopt the other person's point of view. However, when this happens, you should never trust
them too far, as however firmly they may have declared this new point of view in favour of
the defendant they might well go straight back to their offices and write a report for the court
that says just the opposite, and might well be even harder on the defendant than the original
view, the one they insist they've been fully dissuaded from. And, of course, there's no way of
defending yourself from this, something said in private is indeed in private and cannot then
be used in public, it's not something that makes it easy for the defence to keep those
gentlemen's favour. On the other hand, it's also true that the gentlemen don't become involved
with the defence—which will of course be done with great expertise—just for philanthropic
reasons or in order to be friendly, in some respects it would be truer to say that they, too, have
it allocated to them. This is where the disadvantages of a court structure that, right from the
start, stipulates that all proceedings take place in private, come into force. In normal,
mediocre trials its officials have contact with the public, and they're very well equipped for it,
but here they don't; normal trials run their course all by themselves, almost, and just need a
nudge here and there; but when they're faced with cases that are especially difficult they're as
lost as they often are with ones that are very simple; they're forced to spend all their time, day
and night, with their laws, and so they don't have the right feel for human relationships, and
that's a serious shortcoming in cases like this. That's when they come for advice to the
lawyer, with a servant behind them carrying the documents which normally are kept so
secret. You could have seen many gentlemen at this window, gentlemen of whom you would
least expect it, staring out this window in despair on the street below while the lawyer is at
his desk studying the documents so that he can give them good advice. And at times like that
it's also possible to see how exceptionally seriously these gentlemen take their professions
and how they are thrown into great confusion by difficulties which it's just not in their natures
to overcome. But they're not in an easy position, to regard their positions as easy would be to
do them an injustice. The different ranks and hierarchies of the court are endless, and even
someone who knows his way around them cannot always tell what's going to happen. But
even for the junior officials, the proceedings in the courtrooms are usually kept secret, so they
are hardly able to see how the cases they work with proceed, court affairs appear in their
range of vision often without their knowing where they come from and they move on further
without their learning where they go. So civil servants like this are not able to learn the things
you can learn from studying the successive stages that individual trials go through, the final
verdict or the reasons for it. They're only allowed to deal with that part of the trial which the
law allocates them, and they usually know less about the results of their work after it's left
55
them than the defence does, even though the defence will usually stay in contact with the
accused until the trial is nearly at its end, so that the court officials can learn many useful
things from the defence. Bearing all this in mind, does it still surprise K. that the officials are
irritated and often express themselves about the litigants in unflattering ways—which is an
experience shared by everyone. All the officials are irritated, even when they appear calm.
This causes many difficulties for the junior advocates, of course. There is a story, for
instance, that has very much the ring of truth about it. It goes like this: One of the older
officials, a good and peaceful man, was dealing with a difficult matter for the court which had
become very confused, especially thanks to the contributions from the lawyers. He had been
studying it for a day and a night without a break—as these officials are indeed hard working,
no-one works as hard as they do. When it was nearly morning, and he had been working for
twenty-four hours with probably very little result, he went to the front entrance, waited there
in ambush, and every time a lawyer tried to enter the building he would throw him down the
steps. The lawyers gathered together down in front of the steps and discussed with each other
what they should do; on the one hand they had actually no right to be allowed into the
building so that there was hardly anything that they could legally do to the official and, as
I've already mentioned, they would have to be careful not to set all the officials against them.
On the other hand, any day not spent in court is a day lost for them and it was a matter of
some importance to force their way inside. In the end, they agreed that they would try to tire
the old man out. One lawyer after another was sent out to run up the steps and let himself be
thrown down again, offering what resistance he could as long as it was passive resistance,
and his colleagues would catch him at the bottom of the steps. That went on for about an hour
until the old gentleman, who was already exhausted from working all night, was very tired
and went back to his office. Those who were at the bottom of the steps could not believe it at
first, so they sent somebody out to go and look behind the door to see if there really was noone there, and only then did they all gather together and probably didn't even dare to
complain, as it's far from being the lawyers' job to introduce any improvements in the court
system, or even to want to. Even the most junior lawyer can understand the relationship there
to some extent, but one significant point is that almost every defendant, even very simple
people, begins to think of suggestions for improving the court as soon as his proceedings
have begun, many of them often even spend time and energy on the matter that could be
spent far better elsewhere. The only right thing to do is to learn how to deal with the situation
as it is. Even if it were possible to improve any detail of it—which is anyway no more than
superstitious nonsense—the best that they could achieve, although doing themselves
incalculable harm in the process, is that they will have attracted the special attention of the
officials for any case that comes up in the future, and the officials are always ready to seek
revenge. Never attract attention to yourself! Stay calm, however much it goes against your
character! Try to gain some insight into the size of the court organism and how, to some
extent, it remains in a state of suspension, and that even if you alter something in one place
you'll draw the ground out from under your feet and might fall, whereas if an enormous
organism like the court is disrupted in any one place it finds it easy to provide a substitute for
itself somewhere else. Everything is connected with everything else and will continue
without any change or else, which is quite probable, even more closed, more attentive, more
strict, more malevolent. So it's best to leave the work to the lawyers and not to keep
disturbing them. It doesn't do much good to make accusations, especially if you can't make it
clear what they're based on and their full significance, but it must be said that K. caused a
great deal of harm to his own case by his behaviour towards the office director, he was a very
influential man but now he might as well be struck off the list of those who might do
anything for K. If the trial is mentioned, even just in passing, it's quite obvious that he's
ignoring it. These officials are in many ways just like children. Often, something quite
56
harmless—although K.'s behaviour could unfortunately not be called harmless—will leave
them feeling so offended that they will even stop talking with good friends of theirs, they turn
away when they see them and do everything they can to oppose them. But then, with no
particular reason, surprisingly enough, some little joke that was only ever attempted because
everything seemed so hopeless will make them laugh and they'll be reconciled. It's both
difficult and hard at the same time to deal with them, and there's hardly any reason for it. It's
sometimes quite astonishing that a single, average life is enough to encompass so much that
it's at all possible ever to have any success in one's work here. On the other hand, there are
also dark moments, such as everyone has, when you think you've achieved nothing at all,
when it seems that the only trials to come to a good end are those that were determined to
have a good end from the start and would do so without any help, while all the others are lost
despite all the running to and fro, all the effort, all the little, apparent successes that gave such
joy. Then you no longer feel very sure of anything and, if asked about a trial that was doing
well by its own nature but which was turned for the worse because you assisted in it, would
not even dare deny that. And even that is a kind of self-confidence, but then it's the only one
that's left. Lawyers are especially vulnerable to fits of depression of that sort—and they are
no more than fits of depression of course—when a case is suddenly taken out of their hands
after they've been conducting it satisfactorily for some time. That's probably the worst that
can happen to a lawyer. It's not that the accused takes the case away from him, that hardly
ever happens, once a defendant has taken on a certain lawyer he has to stay with him
whatever happens. How could he ever carry on by himself after he's taken on help from a
lawyer? No, that just doesn't happen, but what does sometimes happen is that the trial takes
on a course where the lawyer may not go along with it. Client and trial are both simply taken
away from the lawyer; and then even contact with the court officials won't help, however
good they are, as they don't know anything themselves. The trial will have entered a stage
where no more help can be given, where it's being processed in courts to which no-one has
any access, where the defendant cannot even be contacted by his lawyer. You come home
one day and find all the documents you've submitted, which you've worked hard to create and
which you had the best hopes for, lying on the desk, they've been sent back as they can't be
carried through to the next stage in the trial, they're just worthless scraps of paper. It doesn't
mean that the case has been lost, not at all, or at least there is no decisive reason for
supposing so, it's just that you don't know anything more about the case and won't be told
anything of what's happening. Well, cases like that are the exceptions, I'm glad to say, and
even if K.'s trial is one of them, it's still, for the time being, a long way off. But there was still
plenty of opportunity for lawyers to get to work, and K. could be sure they would be made
use of. As he had said, the time for submitting documents was still in the future and there was
no rush to prepare them, it was much more important to start the initial discussions with the
appropriate officials, and they had already taken place. With varying degrees of success, it
must be said. It was much better not to give away any details before their time, as in that way
K. could only be influenced unfavourably and his hopes might be raised or he might be made
too anxious, better just to say that some individuals have spoken very favourably and shown
themselves very willing to help, although others have spoken less favourably, but even they
have not in any way refused to help. So all in all, the results are very encouraging, only you
should certainly not draw any particular conclusions as all preliminary proceedings begin in
the same way and it was only the way they developed further that would show what the value
of these preliminary proceedings has been. Anyway, nothing has been lost yet, and if we can
succeed in getting the office director, despite everything, on our side—and several actions
have been undertaken to this end—then everything is a clean wound, as a surgeon would say,
and we can wait for the results with some comfort.
57
When he started talking on in this way the lawyer was quite tireless. He went through it all
again every time K. went to see him. There was always some progress, but he could never be
told what sort of progress it was. The first set of documents to be submitted were being
worked on but still not ready, which usually turned out to be a great advantage the next time
K. went to see him as the earlier occasion would have been a very bad time to put them in,
which they could not then have known. If K., stupefied from all this talking, ever pointed out
that even considering all these difficulties progress was very slow, the lawyer would object
that progress was not slow at all, but that they might have progressed far further if K. had
come to him at the right time. But he had come to him late and that lateness would bring still
further difficulties, and not only where time was concerned. The only welcome interruption
during these visits was always when Leni contrived to bring the lawyer his tea while K. was
there. Then she would stand behind K.—pretending to watch the lawyer as he bent greedily
over his cup, poured the tea in and drank—and secretly let K. hold her hand. There was
always complete silence. The lawyer drank. K. squeezed Leni's hand and Leni would
sometimes dare to gently stroke K.'s hair. "Still here, are you?" the lawyer would ask when he
was ready. "I wanted to take the dishes away," said Leni, they would give each other's hands
a final squeeze, the lawyer would wipe his mouth and then start talking at K. again with
renewed energy.
Was the lawyer trying to comfort K. or to confuse him? K. could not tell, but it seemed clear
to him that his defence was not in good hands. Maybe everything the lawyer said was quite
right, even though he obviously wanted to make himself as conspicuous as possible and
probably had never even taken on a case as important as he said K.'s was. But it was still
suspicious how he continually mentioned his personal contacts with the civil servants. Were
they to be exploited solely for K.'s benefit. The lawyer never forgot to mention that they were
dealing only with junior officials, which meant officials who were dependent on others, and
the direction taken in each trial could be important for their own furtherment. Could it be that
they were making use of the lawyer to turn trials in a certain direction, which would, of
course, always be at the cost of the defendant. It certainly did not mean that they would do
that in every trial, that was not likely at all, and there were probably also trials where they
gave the lawyer advantages and all the room he needed to turn it in the direction he wanted,
as it would also be to their advantage to keep his reputation intact. If that really was their
relationship, how would they direct K.'s trial which, as the lawyer had explained, was
especially difficult and therefore important enough to attract great attention from the very
first time it came to court? There could not be much doubt about what they would do. The
first signs of it could already be seen in the fact that the first documents still had not been
submitted even though the trial had already lasted several months, and that, according to the
lawyer, everything was still in its initial stages, which was very effective, of course, in
making the defendant passive and keeping him helpless. Then he could be suddenly surprised
with the verdict, or at least with a notification that the hearing had not decided in his favour
and the matter would be passed on to a higher office.
It was essential that K. take a hand in it himself. On winter's mornings such as this, when he
was very tired and everything dragged itself lethargically through his head, this belief of his
seemed irrefutable. He no longer felt the contempt for the trial that he had had earlier. If he
had been alone in the world it would have been easy for him to ignore it, although it was also
certain that, in that case, the trial would never have arisen in the first place. But now, his
uncle had already dragged him to see the lawyer, he had to take account of his family; his job
was no longer totally separate from the progress of the trial, he himself had carelessly—with
a certain, inexplicable complacency—mentioned it to acquaintances and others had learned
about it in ways he did not know, his relationship with Miss Bürstner seemed to be in trouble
58
because of it. In short, he no longer had any choice whether he would accept the trial or turn
it down, he was in the middle of it and had to defend himself. If he was tired, then that was
bad.
But there was no reason to worry too much before he needed to. He had been capable of
working himself up to his high position in the bank in a relatively short time and to retain it
with respect from everyone, now he simply had to apply some of the talents that had made
that possible for him to the trial, and there was no doubt that it had to turn out well. The most
important thing, if something was to be achieved, was to reject in advance any idea that he
might be in any way guilty. There was no guilt. The trial was nothing but a big piece of
business, just like he had already concluded to the benefit of the bank many times, a piece of
business that concealed many lurking dangers waiting in ambush for him, as they usually did,
and these dangers would need to be defended against. If that was to be achieved then he must
not entertain any idea of guilt, whatever he did, he would need to look after his own interests
as closely as he could. Seen in this way, there was no choice but to take his representation
away from the lawyer very soon, at best that very evening. The lawyer had told him, as he
talked to him, that that was something unheard of and would probably do him a great deal of
harm, but K. could not tolerate any impediment to his efforts where his trial was concerned,
and these impediments were probably caused by the lawyer himself. But once he had shaken
off the lawyer the documents would need to be submitted straight away and, if possible, he
would need to see to it that they were being dealt with every day. It would of course not be
enough, if that was to be done, for K. to sit in the corridor with his hat under the bench like
the others. Day after day, he himself, or one of the women or somebody else on his behalf,
would have to run after the officials and force them to sit at their desks and study K.'s
documents instead of looking out on the corridor through the grating. There could be no letup in these efforts, everything would need to be organised and supervised, it was about time
that the court came up against a defendant who knew how to defend and make use of his
rights.
But when K. had the confidence to try and do all this the difficulty of composing the
documents was too much for him. Earlier, just a week or so before, he could only have felt
shame at the thought of being made to write out such documents himself; it had never entered
his head that the task could also be difficult. He remembered one morning when, already
piled up with work, he suddenly shoved everything to one side and took a pad of paper on
which he sketched out some of his thoughts on how documents of this sort should proceed.
Perhaps he would offer them to that slow-witted lawyer, but just then the door of the
manager's office opened and the deputy director entered the room with a loud laugh. K. was
very embarrassed, although the deputy director, of course, was not laughing at K.'s
documents, which he knew nothing about, but at a joke he had just heard about the stockexchange, a joke which needed an illustration if it was to be understood, and now the deputy
director leant over K.'s desk, took his pencil from his hand, and drew the illustration on the
writing pad that K. had intended for his ideas about his case.
K. now had no more thoughts of shame, the documents had to be prepared and submitted. If,
as was very likely, he could find no time to do it in the office he would have to do it at home
at night. If the nights weren't enough he would have to take a holiday. Above all, he could not
stop half way, that was nonsense not only in business but always and everywhere. Needless
to say, the documents would mean an almost endless amount of work. It was easy to come to
the belief, not only for those of an anxious disposition, that it was impossible ever to finish it.
This was not because of laziness or deceit, which were the only things that might have
hindered the lawyer in preparing it, but because he did not know what the charge was or even
what consequences it might bring, so that he had to remember every tiny action and event
59
from the whole of his life, looking at them from all sides and checking and reconsidering
them. It was also a very disheartening job. It would have been more suitable as a way of
passing the long days after he had retired and become senile. But now, just when K. needed
to apply all his thoughts to his work, when he was still rising and already posed a threat to the
deputy director, when every hour passed so quickly and he wanted to enjoy the brief evenings
and nights as a young man, this was the time he had to start working out these documents.
Once more, he began to feel resentment. Almost involuntarily, only to put an end to it, his
finger felt for the button of the electric bell in the ante-room. As he pressed it he glanced up
to the clock. It was eleven o'clock, two hours, he had spent a great deal of his costly time just
dreaming and his wits were, of course, even more dulled than they had been before. But the
time had, nonetheless, not been wasted, he had come to some decisions that could be of
value. As well as various pieces of mail, the servitors brought two visiting cards from
gentlemen who had already been waiting for K. for some time. They were actually very
important clients of the bank who should not really have been kept waiting under any
circumstances. Why had they come at such an awkward time, and why, the gentlemen on the
other side of the closed door seemed to be asking, was the industrious K. using up the best
business time for his private affairs? Tired from what had gone before, and tired in
anticipation of what was to follow, K. stood up to receive the first of them.
He was a short, jolly man, a manufacturer who K. knew well. He apologised for disturbing K.
at some important work, and K., for his part, apologised for having kept the manufacturer
waiting for so long. But even this apology was spoken in such a mechanical way and with
such false intonation that the manufacturer would certainly have noticed if he had not been
fully preoccupied with his business affairs. Instead, he hurriedly pulled calculations and
tables out from all his pockets, spread them out in front of K., explained several items,
corrected a little mistake in the arithmetic that he noticed as he quickly glanced over it all,
and reminded K. of a similar piece of business he'd concluded with him about a year before,
mentioning in passing that this time there was another bank spending great effort to get his
business, and finally stopped speaking in order to learn K.'s opinion on the matter. And K.
had indeed, at first, been closely following what the manufacturer was saying, he too was
aware of how important the deal was, but unfortunately it did not last, he soon stopped
listening, nodded at each of the manufacturer's louder exclamations for a short while, but
eventually he stopped doing even that and did no more than stare at the bald head bent over
the papers, asking himself when the manufacturer would finally realise that everything he
was saying was useless. When he did stop talking, K. really thought at first that this was so
that he would have the chance to confess that he was incapable of listening. Instead, seeing
the anticipation on the manufacturer's face, obviously ready to counter any objections made,
he was sorry to realise that the business discussion had to be continued. So he bent his head
as if he'd been given an order and began slowly to move his pencil over the papers, now and
then he would stop and stare at one of the figures. The manufacturer thought there must be
some objection, perhaps his figures weren't really sound, perhaps they weren't the decisive
issue, whatever he thought, the manufacturer covered the papers with his hand and began
once again, moving very close to K., to explain what the deal was all about. "It is difficult,"
said K., pursing his lips. The only thing that could offer him any guidance were the papers,
and the manufacturer had covered them from his view, so he just sank back against the arm of
the chair. Even when the door of the manager's office opened and revealed not very clearly,
as if through a veil, the deputy director, he did no more than look up weakly. K. thought no
more about the matter, he merely watched the immediate effect of the deputy director's
appearance and, for him, the effect was very pleasing; the manufacturer immediately jumped
up from his seat and hurried over to meet the deputy director, although K. would have liked
to make him ten times livelier as he feared the deputy director might disappear again. He
60
need not have worried, the two gentlemen met each other, shook each other's hand and went
together over to K.'s desk. The manufacturer said he was sorry to find the chief clerk so little
inclined to do business, pointing to K. who, under the view of the deputy director, had bent
back down over the papers. As the two men leant over the desk and the manufacturer made
some effort to gain and keep the deputy director's attention, K. felt as if they were much
bigger than they really were and that their negotiations were about him. Carefully and slowly
turning his eyes upwards, he tried to learn what was taking place above him, took one of the
papers from his desk without looking to see what it was, lay it on the flat of his hand and
raised it slowly up as he rose up to the level of the two men himself. He had no particular
plan in mind as he did this, but merely felt this was how he would act if only he had finished
preparing that great document that was to remove his burden entirely. The deputy director
had been paying all his attention to the conversation and did no more than glance at the paper,
he did not read what was written on it at all as what was important for the chief clerk was not
important for him, he took it from K.'s hand saying, "Thank you, I'm already familiar with
everything," and laid it calmly back on the desk. K. gave him a bitter, sideways look. But the
deputy director did not notice this at all, or if he did notice it it only raised his spirits, he
frequently laughed out loud, one time he clearly embarrassed the manufacturer when he
raised an objection in a witty way but drew him immediately back out of his embarrassment
by commenting adversely on himself, and finally invited him into his office where they could
bring the matter to its conclusion. "It's a very important matter," said the manufacturer. "I
understand that completely. And I'm sure the chief clerk ..."—even as he said this he was
actually speaking only to the manufacturer—"will be very glad to have us take it off his
hands. This is something that needs calm consideration. But he seems to be over-burdened
today, there are even some people in the room outside who've been waiting there for hours
for him." K. still had enough control of himself to turn away from the deputy director and
direct his friendly, albeit stiff, smile only at the manufacturer, he made no other retaliation,
bent down slightly and supported himself with both hands on his desk like a clerk, and
watched as the two gentlemen, still talking, took the papers from his desk and disappeared
into the manager's office. In the doorway, the manufacturer turned and said he wouldn't make
his farewell with K. just yet, he would of course let the chief clerk know about the success of
his discussions but he also had a little something to tell him about.
At last, K. was by himself. It did not enter his head to show anyone else into his office and
only became vaguely aware of how nice it was that the people outside thought he was still
negotiating with the manufacturer and, for this reason, he could not let anyone in to see him,
not even the servitor. He went over to the window, sat down on the ledge beside it, held
firmly on to the handle and looked down onto the square outside. The snow was still falling,
the weather still had not brightened up at all.
He remained a long time sitting in this way, not knowing what it actually was that made him
so anxious, only occasionally did he glance, slightly startled, over his shoulder at the door to
the outer room where, mistakenly, he thought he'd heard some noise. No-one came, and that
made him feel calmer, he went over to the wash stand, rinsed his face with cold water and,
his head somewhat clearer, went back to his place by the window. The decision to take his
defence into his own hands now seemed more of a burden than he had originally assumed.
All the while he had left his defence up to the lawyer his trial had had little basic affect on
him, he had observed it from afar as something that was scarcely able to reach him directly,
when it suited him he looked to see how things stood but he was also able to draw his head
back again whenever he wanted. Now, in contrast, if he was to conduct his defence himself,
he would have to devote himself entirely to the court—for the time being, at least—success
would mean, later on, his complete and conclusive liberation, but if he was to achieve this he
61
would have to place himself, to start with, in far greater danger than he had been in so far. If
he ever felt tempted to doubt this, then his experience with the deputy director and the
manufacturer that day would be quite enough to convince him of it. How could he have sat
there totally convinced of the need to do his own defence? How would it be later? What
would his life be like in the days ahead? Would he find the way through it all to a happy
conclusion? Did a carefully worked out defence—and any other sort would have made no
sense—did a carefully worked out defence not also mean he would need to shut himself off
from everything else as much as he could? Would he survive that? And how was he to
succeed in conducting all this at the bank? It involved much more than just submitting some
documents that he could probably prepare in a few days' leave, although it would have been
great temerity to ask for time off from the bank just at that time, it was a whole trial and there
was no way of seeing how long it might last. This was an enormous difficulty that had
suddenly been thrown into K.'s life!
And was he supposed to be doing the bank's work at a time like this? He looked down at his
desk. Was he supposed to let people in to see him and go into negotiations with them at a
time like this? While his trial trundled on, while the court officials upstairs in the attic room
sat looking at the papers for this trial, should he be worrying about the business of the bank?
Did this not seem like a kind of torture, acknowledged by the court, connected with the trial
and which followed him around? And is it likely that anyone in the bank, when judging his
work, would take any account of his peculiar situation? No-one and never. There were those
who knew about his trial, although it was not quite clear who knew about it or how much. But
he hoped rumours had not reached as far as the deputy director, otherwise he would
obviously soon find a way of making use of it to harm K., he would show neither
comradeship nor humaneness. And what about the director? It was true that he was well
disposed towards K., and as soon as he heard about the trial he would probably try to do
everything he could to make it easier for him, but he would certainly not devote himself to it.
K. at one time had provided the counter-balance to what the deputy director said but the
director was now coming more and more under his influence, and the deputy director would
also exploit the weakened condition of the director to strengthen his own power. So what
could K. hope for? Maybe considerations of this sort weakened his power of resistance, but it
was still necessary not to deceive oneself and to see everything as clearly as it could be seen
at that moment.
For no particular reason, just to avoiding returning to his desk for a while, he opened the
window. It was difficult to open and he had to turn the handle with both his hands. Then,
through the whole height and breadth of the window, the mixture of fog and smoke was
drawn into the room, filling it with a slight smell of burning. A few flakes of snow were
blown in with it. "It's a horrible autumn," said the manufacturer, who had come into the room
unnoticed after seeing the deputy director and now stood behind K. K. nodded and looked
uneasily at the manufacturer's briefcase, from which he would now probably take the papers
and inform K. of the result of his negotiations with the deputy director. However, the
manufacturer saw where K. was looking, knocked on his briefcase and without opening it
said, "You'll be wanting to hear how things turned out. I've already got the contract in my
pocket, almost. He's a charming man, your deputy director—he's got his dangers, though." He
laughed as he shook K.'s hand and wanted to make him laugh with him. But to K., it once
more seemed suspicious that the manufacturer did not want to show him the papers and saw
nothing about his comments to laugh at. "Chief clerk," said the manufacturer, "I expect the
weather's been affecting your mood, has it? You're looking so worried today." "Yes," said K.,
raising his hand and holding the temple of his head, "headaches, worries in the family."
"Quite right," said the manufacturer, who was always in a hurry and could never listen to
62
anyone for very long, "everyone has his cross to bear." K. had unconsciously made a step
towards the door as if wanting to show the manufacturer out, but the manufacturer said,
"Chief clerk, there's something else I'd like to mention to you. I'm very sorry if it's something
that'll be a burden to you today of all days but I've been to see you twice already, lately, and
each time I forgot all about it. If I delay it any longer it might well lose its point altogether.
That would be a pity, as I think what I've got to say does have some value." Before K. had
had the time to answer, the manufacturer came up close to him, tapped his knuckle lightly on
his chest and said quietly, "You've got a trial going on, haven't you?" K. stepped back and
immediately exclaimed, "That's what the deputy director's been telling you!" "No, no," said
the manufacturer, "how would the deputy director know about it?" "And what about you?"
asked K., already more in control of himself. "I hear things about the court here and there,"
said the manufacturer, "and that even applies to what it is that I wanted to tell you about."
"There are so many people who have connections with the court!" said K. with lowered head,
and he led the manufacturer over to his desk. They sat down where they had been before, and
the manufacturer said, "I'm afraid it's not very much that I've got to tell you about. Only, in
matters like this, it's best not to overlook the tiniest details. Besides, I really want to help you
in some way, however modest my help might be. We've been good business partners up till
now, haven't we? Well then." K. wanted to apologise for his behaviour in the conversation
earlier that day, but the manufacturer would tolerate no interruption, shoved his briefcase up
high in his armpit to show that he was in a hurry, and carried on. "I know about your case
through a certain Titorelli. He's a painter, Titorelli's just his artistic name, I don't even know
what his real name is. He's been coming to me in my office for years from time to time, and
brings little pictures with him which I buy more or less just for the sake of charity as he's
hardly more than a beggar. And they're nice pictures, too, moorland landscapes and that sort
of thing. We'd both got used to doing business in this way and it always went smoothly.
Only, one time these visits became a bit too frequent, I began to tell him off for it, we started
talking and I became interested how it was that he could earn a living just by painting, and
then I learned to my amazement that his main source of income was painting portraits. 'I
work for the court,' he said, 'what court?' said I. And that's when he told me about the court.
I'm sure you can imagine how amazed I was at being told all this. Ever since then I learn
something new about the court every time he comes to visit, and so little by little I get to
understand something of how it works. Anyway, Titorelli talks a lot and I often have to push
him away, not only because he's bound to be lying but also, most of all, because a
businessman like me who's already close to breaking point under the weight of his own
business worries can't pay too much attention to other people's. But all that's just by the by.
Perhaps—this is what I've been thinking—perhaps Titorelli might be able to help you in
some small way, he knows lots of judges and even if he can't have much influence himself he
can give you some advice about how to get some influential people on your side. And even if
this advice doesn't turn out to make all the difference I still think it'll be very important once
you've got it. You're nearly a lawyer yourself. That's what I always say, Mr. K. the chief clerk
is nearly a lawyer. Oh I'm sure this trial of yours will turn out all right. So do you want to go
and see Titorelli, then. If I ask him to he'll certainly do everything he possibly can. I really do
think you ought to go. It needn't be today, of course, just some time, when you get the
chance. And anyway—I want to tell you this too—you don't actually have to go and see
Titorelli, this advice from me doesn't place you under any obligation at all. No, if you think
you can get by without Titorelli it'll certainly be better to leave him completely out of it.
Maybe you've already got a clear idea of what you're doing and Titorelli could upset your
plans. No, if that's the case then of course you shouldn't go there under any circumstances!
And it certainly won't be easy to take advice from a lad like that. Still, it's up to you. Here's
the letter of recommendation and here's the address."
63
Disappointed, K. took the letter and put it in his pocket. Even at best, the advantage he might
derive from this recommendation was incomparably smaller than the damage that lay in the
fact of the manufacturer knowing about his trial, and that the painter was spreading the news
about. It was all he could manage to give the manufacturer, who was already on his way to
the door, a few words of thanks. "I'll go there," he said as he took his leave of the
manufacturer at the door, "or, as I'm very busy at present, I'll write to him, perhaps he would
like to come to me in my office some time." "I was sure you'd find the best solution," said the
manufacturer. "Although I had thought you'd prefer to avoid inviting people like this Titorelli
to the bank and talking about the trial here. And it's not always a good idea to send letters to
people like Titorelli, you don't know what might happen to them. But you're bound to have
thought everything through and you know what you can and can't do." K. nodded and
accompanied the manufacturer on through the ante-room. But despite seeming calm on the
outside he was actually very shocked; he had told the manufacturer he would write to
Titorelli only to show him in some way that he valued his recommendations and would
consider the opportunity to speak with Titorelli without delay, but if he had thought Titorelli
could offer any worthwhile assistance he would not have delayed. But it was only the
manufacturer's comment that made K. realise what dangers that could lead to. Was he really
able to rely on his own understanding so little? If it was possible that he might invite a
questionable character into the bank with a clear letter, and ask advice from him about his
trial, separated from the deputy director by no more than a door, was it not possible or even
very likely that there were also other dangers he had failed to see or that he was even running
towards? There was not always someone beside him to warn him. And just now, just when he
would have to act with all the strength he could muster, now a number of doubts of a sort he
had never before known had presented themselves and affected his own vigilance! The
difficulties he had been feeling in carrying out his office work; were they now going to affect
the trial too? Now, at least, he found himself quite unable to understand how he could have
intended to write to Titorelli and invite him into the bank.
He shook his head at the thought of it once more as the servitor came up beside him and drew
his attention to the three gentlemen who were waiting on a bench in the ante-room. They had
already been waiting to see K. for a long time. Now that the servitor was speaking with K.
they had stood up and each of them wanted to make use of the opportunity to see K. before
the others. It had been negligent of the bank to let them waste their time here in the waiting
room, but none of them wanted to draw attention to this. "Mr. K., ..." one of them was saying,
but K. had told the servitor to fetch his winter coat and said to the three of them, as the
servitor helped him to put it on, "Please forgive me, gentlemen, I'm afraid I have no time to
see you at present. Please do forgive me but I have some urgent business to settle and have to
leave straight away. You've already seen yourselves how long I've been delayed. Would you
be so kind as to come back tomorrow or some time? Or perhaps we could settle your affairs
by telephone. Or perhaps you would like to tell me now, briefly, what it's about and I can
then give you a full answer in writing. Whatever, the best thing will be for you to come here
again." The gentlemen now saw that their wait had been totally pointless, and these
suggestions of K.'s left them so astounded that they looked at each other without a word.
"That's agreed then, is it?" asked K., who had turned toward the servitor bringing him his hat.
Through the open door of K.'s office they could see that the snowfall outside had become
much heavier. So K. turned the collar of his coat up and buttoned it up high under his chin.
Just then the deputy director came out of the adjoining room, smiled as he saw K. negotiating
with the gentlemen in his winter coat, and asked, "Are you about to go out?" "Yes," said K.,
standing more upright, "I have to go out on some business." But the deputy director had
already turned towards the gentlemen. "And what about these gentlemen?" he asked. "I think
they've already been waiting quite a long time." "We've already come to an understanding,"
64
said K. But now the gentlemen could be held back no longer, they surrounded K. and
explained that they would not have been waiting for hours if it had not been about something
important that had to be discussed now, at length and in private. The deputy director listened
to them for a short while, he also looked at K. as he held his hat in his hand cleaning the dust
off it here and there, and then he said, "Gentlemen, there is a very simple way to solve this. If
you would prefer it, I'll be very glad to take over these negotiations instead of the chief clerk.
Your business does, of course, need to be discussed without delay. We are businessmen like
yourselves and know the value of a businessman's time. Would you like to come this way?"
And he opened the door leading to the ante-room of his own office.
The deputy director seemed very good at appropriating everything that K. was now forced to
give up! But was K. not giving up more than he absolutely had to? By running off to some
unknown painter, with, as he had to admit, very little hope of any vague benefit, his renown
was suffering damage that could not be repaired. It would probably be much better to take off
his winter coat again and, at the very least, try to win back the two gentlemen who were
certainly still waiting in the next room. If K. had not then glimpsed the deputy director in his
office, looking for something from his bookshelves as if they were his own, he would
probably even have made the attempt. As K., somewhat agitated, approached the door the
deputy director called out, "Oh, you've still not left!" He turned his face toward him—its
many deep folds seemed to show strength rather than age—and immediately began once
more to search. "I'm looking for a copy of a contract," he said, "which this gentleman insists
you must have. Could you help me look for it, do you think?" K. made a step forward, but the
deputy director said, "thank you, I've already found it," and with a big package of papers,
which certainly must have included many more documents than just the copy of the contract,
he turned and went back into his own office.
"I can't deal with him right now," K. said to himself, "but once my personal difficulties have
been settled, then he'll certainly be the first to get the effect of it, and he certainly won't like
it." Slightly calmed by these thoughts, K. gave the servitor, who had already long been
holding the door to the corridor open for him, the task of telling the director, when he was
able, that K. was going out of the bank on a business matter. As he left the bank he felt
almost happy at the thought of being able to devote more of himself to his own business for a
while.
He went straight to the painter, who lived in an outlying part of town which was very near to
the court offices, although this area was even poorer, the houses were darker, the streets were
full of dirt that slowly blew about over the half-melted snow. In the great gateway to the
building where the painter lived only one of the two doors was open, a hole had been broken
open in the wall by the other door, and as K. approached it a repulsive, yellow, steaming
liquid shot out causing some rats to scurry away into the nearby canal. Down by the staircase
there was a small child lying on its belly crying, but it could hardly be heard because of the
noise from a metal-workshop on the other side of the entrance hall, drowning out any other
sound. The door to the workshop was open, three workers stood in a circle around some piece
of work that they were beating with hammers. A large tin plate hung on the wall, casting a
pale light that pushed its way in between two of the workers, lighting up their faces and their
work-aprons. K. did no more than glance at any of these things, he wanted to get things over
with here as soon as possible, to exchange just a few words to find out how things stood with
the painter and go straight back to the bank. Even if he had just some tiny success here it
would still have a good effect on his work at the bank for that day. On the third floor he had
to slow down his pace, he was quite out of breath—the steps, just like the height of each
floor, were much higher than they needed to be and he'd been told that the painter lived right
up in the attic. The air was also quite oppressive, there was no proper stairwell and the
65
narrow steps were closed in by walls on both sides with no more than a small, high window
here and there. Just as K. paused for a while some young girls ran out of one of the flats and
rushed higher up the stairs, laughing. K. followed them slowly, caught up with one of the
girls who had stumbled and been left behind by the others, and asked her as they went up side
by side, "Is there a painter, Titorelli, who lives here?" The girl, hardly thirteen years old and
somewhat hunchbacked, jabbed him with her elbow and looked at him sideways. Her youth
and her bodily defects had done nothing to stop her being already quite depraved. She did not
smile once, but looked at K. earnestly, with sharp, acquisitive eyes. K. pretended not to notice
her behaviour and asked, "Do you know Titorelli, the painter?" She nodded and asked in
reply, "What d'you want to see him for?" K. thought it would be to his advantage quickly to
find out something more about Titorelli. "I want to have him paint my portrait," he said.
"Paint your portrait?" she asked, opening her mouth too wide and lightly hitting K. with her
hand as if he had said something extraordinarily surprising or clumsy, with both hands she
lifted her skirt, which was already very short, and, as fast as she could, she ran off after the
other girls whose indistinct shouts lost themselves in the heights. At the next turn of the
stairs, however, K. encountered all the girls once more. The hunchbacked girl had clearly told
them about K.'s intentions and they were waiting for him. They stood on both sides of the
stairs, pressing themselves against the wall so that K. could get through between them, and
smoothed their aprons down with their hands. All their faces, even in this guard of honour,
showed a mixture of childishness and depravity. Up at the head of the line of girls, who now,
laughing, began to close in around K., was the hunchback who had taken on the role of
leader. It was thanks to her that K. found the right direction without delay—he would have
continued up the stairs straight in front of him, but she showed him that to reach Titorelli he
would need to turn off to one side. The steps that led up to the painter were especially narrow,
very long without any turning, the whole length could be seen in one glance and, at the top, at
Titorelli's closed door, it came to its end. This door was much better illuminated than the rest
of the stairway by the light from a small skylight set obliquely above it, it had been put
together from unpainted planks of wood and the name 'Titorelli' was painted on it in broad,
red brushstrokes. K. was no more than half way up the steps, accompanied by his retinue of
girls, when, clearly the result of the noise of all those footsteps, the door opened slightly and
in the crack a man who seemed to be dressed in just his nightshirt appeared. "Oh!" he cried,
when he saw the approaching crowd, and vanished. The hunchbacked girl clapped her hands
in glee and the other girls crowded in behind K. to push him faster forward.
They still had not arrived at the top, however, when the painter up above them suddenly
pulled the door wide open and, with a deep bow, invited K. to enter. The girls, on the other
hand, he tried to keep away, he did not want to let any of them in however much they begged
him and however much they tried to get in—if they could not get in with his permission they
would try to force their way in against his will. The only one to succeed was the hunchback
when she slipped through under his outstretched arm, but the painter chased after her,
grabbed her by the skirt, span her once round and set her down again by the door with the
other girls who, unlike the first, had not dared to cross the doorstep while the painter had left
his post. K. did not know what he was to make of all this, as they all seemed to be having fun.
One behind the other, the girls by the door stretched their necks up high and called out
various words to the painter which were meant in jest but which K. did not understand, and
even the painter laughed as the hunchback whirled round in his hand. Then he shut the door,
bowed once more to K., offered him his hand and introduced himself, saying, "Titorelli,
painter." K. pointed to the door, behind which the girls were whispering, and said, "You seem
to be very popular in this building." "Ach, those brats!" said the painter, trying in vain to
fasten his nightshirt at the neck. He was also bare-footed and, apart from that, was wearing
nothing more than a loose pair of yellowish linen trousers held up with a belt whose free end
66
whipped to and fro. "Those kids are a real burden for me," he continued. The top button of
his nightshirt came off and he gave up trying to fasten it, fetched a chair for K. and made him
sit down on it. "I painted one of them once—she's not here today—and ever since then
they've been following me about. If I'm here they only come in when I allow it, but as soon as
I've gone out there's always at least one of them in here. They had a key made to my door and
lend it round to each other. It's hard to imagine what a pain that is. Suppose I come back
home with a lady I'm going to paint, I open the door with my own key and find the
hunchback there or something, by the table painting her lips red with my paintbrush, and
meanwhile her little sisters will be keeping guard for her, moving about and causing chaos in
every corner of the room. Or else, like happened yesterday, I might come back home late in
the evening—please forgive my appearance and the room being in a mess, it is to do with
them—so, I might come home late in the evening and want to go to bed, then I feel
something pinching my leg, look under the bed and pull another of them out from under it. I
don't know why it is they bother me like this, I expect you've just seen that I do nothing to
encourage them to come near me. And they make it hard for me to do my work too, of
course. If I didn't get this studio for nothing I'd have moved out a long time ago." Just then, a
little voice, tender and anxious, called out from under the door, "Titorelli, can we come in
now?" "No," answered the painter. "Not even just me, by myself?" the voice asked again.
"Not even just you," said the painter, as he went to the door and locked it.
Meanwhile, K. had been looking round the room, if it had not been pointed out it would never
have occurred to him that this wretched little room could be called a studio. It was hardly
long enough or broad enough to make two steps. Everything, floor, walls and ceiling, was
made of wood, between the planks narrow gaps could be seen. Across from where K. was,
the bed stood against the wall under a covering of many different colours. In the middle of
the room a picture stood on an easel, covered over with a shirt whose arms dangled down to
the ground. Behind K. was the window through which the fog made it impossible to see
further than the snow covered roof of the neighbouring building.
The turning of the key in the lock reminded K. that he had not wanted to stay too long. So he
drew the manufacturer's letter out from his pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I
learned about you from this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on his advice that
I've come here." The painter glanced through the letter and threw it down onto the bed. If the
manufacturer had not said very clearly that Titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man
who was dependent on his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believe
that Titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not remember him. This impression
was augmented by the painter's asking, "Were you wanting to buy some pictures or did you
want to have yourself painted?" K. looked at the painter in astonishment. What did the letter
actually say? K. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer had explained to the
painter in his letter that K. wanted nothing more with him than to find out more about his
trial. He had been far too rash in coming here! But now he had to give the painter some sort
of answer and, glancing at the easel, said, "Are you working on a picture currently?" "Yes,"
said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging over the easel and threw it onto the bed after
the letter. "It's a portrait. Quite a good piece of work, although it's not quite finished yet."
This was a convenient coincidence for K., it gave him a good opportunity to talk about the
court as the picture showed, very clearly, a judge. What's more, it was remarkably similar to
the picture in the lawyer's office, although this one showed a quite different judge, a heavy
man with a full beard which was black and bushy and extended to the sides far up the man's
cheeks. The lawyer's picture was also an oil painting, whereas this one had been made with
pastel colours and was pale and unclear. But everything else about the picture was similar, as
this judge, too, was holding tightly to the arm of his throne and seemed ominously about to
67
rise from it. At first K. was about to say, "He certainly is a judge," but he held himself back
for the time being and went closer to the picture as if he wanted to study it in detail. There
was a large figure shown in the middle of the throne's back rest which K. could not
understand and asked the painter about it. That'll need some more work done on it, the painter
told him, and taking a pastel crayon from a small table he added a few strokes to the edges of
the figure but without making it any clearer as far as K. could make out. "That's the figure of
justice," said the painter, finally. "Now I see," said K., "here's the blindfold and here are the
scales. But aren't those wings on her heels, and isn't she moving?" "Yes," said the painter, "I
had to paint it like that according to the contract. It's actually the figure of justice and the
goddess of victory all in one." "That is not a good combination," said K. with a smile.
"Justice needs to remain still, otherwise the scales will move about and it won't be possible to
make a just verdict." "I'm just doing what the client wanted," said the painter. "Yes,
certainly," said K., who had not meant to criticise anyone by that comment. "You've painted
the figure as it actually appears on the throne." "No," said the painter, "I've never seen that
figure or that throne, it's all just invention, but they told me what it was I had to paint."
"How's that?" asked K. pretending not fully to understand what the painter said. "That is a
judge sitting on the judge's chair, isn't it?" "Yes," said the painter, "but that judge isn't very
high up and he's never sat on any throne like that." "And he has himself painted in such a
grand pose. He's sitting there just like the president of the court." "Yeah, gentlemen like this
are very vain," said the painter. "But they have permission from higher up to get themselves
painted like this. It's laid down quite strictly just what sort of portrait each of them can get for
himself. Only it's a pity that you can't make out the details of his costume and pose in this
picture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people like this." "Yes," said K., "it
does seem odd that it's in pastel colours." "That's what the judge wanted," said the painter,
"it's meant to be for a woman." The sight of the picture seemed to make him feel like
working, he rolled up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons, and K. watched as a
reddish shadow built up around the head of the judge under their quivering tips and radiated
out the to edges of the picture. This shadow play slowly surrounded the head like a
decoration or lofty distinction. But around the figure of Justice, apart from some coloration
that was barely noticeable, it remained light, and in this brightness the figure seemed to shine
forward so that it now looked like neither the God of Justice nor the God of Victory, it
seemed now, rather, to be a perfect depiction of the God of the Hunt. K. found the painter's
work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally he reproached himself for staying so
long without having done anything relevant to his own affair. "What's the name of this
judge?" he asked suddenly. "I'm not allowed to tell you that," the painter answered. He was
bent deeply over the picture and clearly neglecting his guest who, at first, he had received
with such care. K. took this to be just a foible of the painter's, and it irritated him as it made
him lose time. "I take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said. The painter immediately
put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his hands together and looked at K. with a smile.
"Always straight out with the truth," he said. "You want to learn something about the court,
like it says in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking about my pictures to
get me on your side. Still, I won't hold it against you, you weren't to know that that was
entirely the wrong thing to try with me. Oh, please!" he said sharply, repelling K.'s attempt to
make some objection. He then continued, "And besides, you're quite right in your comment
that I'm a trustee of the court." He made a pause, as if wanting to give K. the time to come to
terms with this fact. The girls could once more be heard from behind the door. They were
probably pressed around the keyhole, perhaps they could even see into the room through the
gaps in the planks. K. forewent the opportunity to excuse himself in some way as he did not
wish to distract the painter from what he was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get
too far above himself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he asked,
68
"Is that a publicly acknowledged position?" "No," was the painter's curt reply, as if the
question prevented him saying any more. But K. wanted him to continue speaking and said,
"Well, positions like that, that aren't officially acknowledged, can often have more influence
than those that are." "And that's how it is with me," said the painter, and nodded with a
frown. "I was talking about your case with the manufacturer yesterday, and he asked me if I
wouldn't like to help you, and I answered: 'He can come and see me if he likes,' and now I'm
pleased to see you here so soon. This business seems to be quite important to you, and, of
course, I'm not surprised at that. Would you not like to take your coat off now?" K. had
intended to stay for only a very short time, but the painter's invitation was nonetheless very
welcome. The air in the room had slowly become quite oppressive for him, he had several
times looked in amazement at a small, iron stove in the corner that certainly could not have
been lit, the heat of the room was inexplicable. As he took off his winter overcoat and also
unbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I must have warmth. And it is
very cosy here, isn't it. This room's very good in that respect." K. made no reply, but it was
actually not the heat that made him uncomfortable but, much more, the stuffiness, the air that
almost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probably not been ventilated for a long
time. The unpleasantness of this was made all the stronger for K. when the painter invited
him to sit on the bed while he himself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the
easel. The painter even seemed to misunderstand why K. remained at the edge of the bed and
urged K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitated he went over to the bed himself
and pressed K. deep down into the bedclothes and pillows. Then he went back to his seat and
at last he asked his first objective question, which made K. forget everything else. "You're
innocent, are you?" he asked. "Yes," said K. He felt a simple joy at answering this question,
especially as the answer was given to a private individual and therefore would have no
consequences. Up till then no-one had asked him this question so openly. To make the most
of his pleasure he added, "I am totally innocent." "So," said the painter, and he lowered his
head and seemed to be thinking. Suddenly he raised his head again and said, "Well if you're
innocent it's all very simple." K. began to scowl, this supposed trustee of the court was
talking like an ignorant child. "My being innocent does not make things simple," said K.
Despite everything, he couldn't help smiling and slowly shook his head. "There are many fine
details in which the court gets lost, but in the end it reaches into some place where originally
there was nothing and pulls enormous guilt out of it." "Yeah, yeah, sure," said the painter, as
if K. had been disturbing his train of thought for no reason. "But you are innocent, aren't
you?" "Well of course I am," said K. "That's the main thing," said the painter. There was no
counter-argument that could influence him, but although he had made up his mind it was not
clear whether he was talking this way because of conviction or indifference. K., then, wanted
to find out and said therefore, "I'm sure you're more familiar with the court than I am, I know
hardly more about it than what I've heard, and that's been from many very different people.
But they were all agreed on one thing, and that was that when ill thought-out accusations are
made they are not ignored, and that once the court has made an accusation it is convinced of
the guilt of the defendant and it's very hard to make it think otherwise." "Very hard?" the
painter asked, throwing one hand up in the air. "It's impossible to make it think otherwise. If I
painted all the judges next to each other here on canvas, and you were trying to defend
yourself in front of it, you'd have more success with them than you'd ever have with the real
court." "Yes," said K. to himself, forgetting that he had only gone there to investigate the
painter.
One of the girls behind the door started up again, and asked, "Titorelli, is he going to go
soon?" "Quiet!" shouted the painter at the door, "Can't you see I'm talking with the
gentleman?" But this was not enough to satisfy the girl and she asked, "You going to paint his
picture?" And when the painter didn't answer she added, "Please don't paint him, he's an
69
'orrible bloke." There followed an incomprehensible, interwoven babble of shouts and replies
and calls of agreement. The painter leapt over to the door, opened it very slightly—the girls'
clasped hands could be seen stretching through the crack as if they wanted something—and
said, "If you're not quiet I'll throw you all down the stairs. Sit down here on the steps and be
quiet." They probably did not obey him immediately, so that he had to command, "Down on
the steps!" Only then it became quiet.
"I'm sorry about that," said the painter as he returned to K. K. had hardly turned towards the
door, he had left it completely up to the painter whether and how he would place him under
his protection if he wanted to. Even now, he made hardly any movement as the painter bent
over him and, whispering into his ear in order not to be heard outside, said, "These girls
belong to the court as well." "How's that?" asked K., as he leant his head to one side and
looked at the painter. But the painter sat back down on his chair and, half in jest, half in
explanation, "Well, everything belongs to the court." "That is something I had never noticed
until now," said K. curtly, this general comment of the painter's made his comment about the
girls far less disturbing. Nonetheless, K. looked for a while at the door, behind which the girls
were now sitting quietly on the steps. Except, that one of them had pushed a drinking straw
through a crack between the planks and was moving it slowly up and down. "You still don't
seem to have much general idea of what the court's about," said the painter, who had
stretched his legs wide apart and was tapping loudly on the floor with the tip of his foot. "But
as you're innocent you won't need it anyway. I'll get you out of this by myself." "How do you
intend to do that?" asked K. "You did say yourself not long ago that it's quite impossible to
go to the court with reasons and proofs." "Only impossible for reasons and proofs you take to
the court yourself," said the painter, raising his forefinger as if K. had failed to notice a fine
distinction. "It goes differently if you try to do something behind the public court, that's to
say in the consultation rooms, in the corridors or here, for instance, in my studio." K. now
began to find it far easier to believe what the painter was saying, or rather it was largely in
agreement with what he had also been told by others. In fact it was even quite promising. If it
really was so easy to influence the judges through personal contacts as the lawyer had said
then the painter's contacts with these vain judges was especially important, and at the very
least should not be undervalued. And the painter would fit in very well in the circle of
assistants that K. was slowly gathering around himself. He had been noted at the bank for his
talent in organising, here, where he was placed entirely on his own resources, would be a
good opportunity to test that talent to its limits. The painter observed the effect his
explanation had had on K. and then, with a certain unease, said, "Does it not occur to you that
the way I'm speaking is almost like a lawyer? It's the incessant contact with the gentlemen of
the court has that influence on me. I gain a lot by it, of course, but I lose a lot, artistically
speaking." "How did you first come into contact with the judges, then?" asked K., he wanted
first to gain the painter's trust before he took him into his service. "That was very easy," said
the painter, "I inherited these contacts. My father was court painter before me. It's a position
that's always inherited. They can't use new people for it, the rules governing how the various
grades of officials are painted are so many and varied, and, above all, so secret that no-one
outside of certain families even knows them. In the drawer there, for instance, I've got my
father's notes, which I don't show to anyone. But you're only able to paint judges if you know
what they say. Although, even if I lost them no-one could ever dispute my position because
of all the rules I just carry round in my head. All the judges want to be painted like the old,
great judges were, and I'm the only one who can do that." "You are to be envied," said K.,
thinking of his position at the bank. "Your position is quite unassailable, then?" "Yes, quite
unassailable," said the painter, and he raised his shoulders in pride. "That's how I can even
afford to help some poor man facing trial now and then." "And how do you do that?" asked
K., as if the painter had not just described him as a poor man. The painter did not let himself
70
be distracted, but said, "In your case, for instance, as you're totally innocent, this is what I'll
do." The repeated mention of K.'s innocence was becoming irksome to him. It sometimes
seemed to him as if the painter was using these comments to make a favourable outcome to
the trial a precondition for his help, which of course would make the help itself unnecessary.
But despite these doubts K. forced himself not to interrupt the painter. He did not want to do
without the painter's help, that was what he had decided, and this help did not seem in any
way less questionable than that of the lawyer. K. valued the painter's help far more highly
because it was offered in a way that was more harmless and open.
The painter had pulled his seat closer to the bed and continued in a subdued voice: "I forgot
to ask you: what sort of acquittal is it you want. There are three possibilities: absolute
acquittal, apparent acquittal and deferment. Absolute acquittal is the best, of course, only
there's nothing I could do to get that sort of outcome. I don't think there's anyone at all who
could do anything to get an absolute acquittal. Probably the only thing that could do that is if
the accused is innocent. As you are innocent it could actually be possible and you could
depend on your innocence alone. In that case you won't need me or any other kind of help."
At first, K. was astonished at this orderly explanation, but then, just as quietly as the painter,
he said, "I think you're contradicting yourself." "How's that?" asked the painter patiently,
leaning back with a smile. This smile made K. feel as if he were examining not the words of
the painter but seeking out inconsistencies in the procedures of the court itself. Nonetheless,
he continued unabashed and said, "You remarked earlier that the court cannot be approached
with reasoned proofs, you later restricted this to the open court, and now you go so far as to
say that an innocent man needs no assistance in court. That entails a contradiction. Moreover,
you said earlier that the judges can be influenced personally but now you insist that an
absolute acquittal, as you call it, can never be attained through personal influence. That
entails a second contradiction." "It's quite easy to clear up these contradictions," said the
painter. "We're talking about two different things here, there's what it says in the law and
there's what I know from my own experience, you shouldn't get the two confused. I've never
seen it in writing, but the law does, of course, say on the one hand that the innocent will be
set free, but on the other hand it doesn't say that the judges can be influenced. But in my
experience it's the other way round. I don't know of any absolute acquittals but I do know of
many times when a judge has been influenced. It's possible, of course, that there was no
innocence in any of the cases I know about. But is that likely? Not a single innocent
defendant in so many cases? When I was a boy I used to listen closely to my father when he
told us about court cases at home, and the judges that came to his studio talked about the
court, in our circles nobody talks about anything else; I hardly ever got the chance to go to
court myself but always made use of it when I could, I've listened to countless trials at
important stages in their development, I've followed them closely as far as they could be
followed, and I have to say that I've never seen a single acquittal." "So. Not a single
acquittal," said K., as if talking to himself and his hopes. "That confirms the impression I
already have of the court. So there's no point in it from this side either. They could replace
the whole court with a single hangman." "You shouldn't generalise," said the painter,
dissatisfied, "I've only been talking about my own experience." "Well that's enough," said K.,
"or have you heard of any acquittals that happened earlier?" "They say there have been some
acquittals earlier," the painter answered, "but it's very hard to be sure about it. The courts
don't make their final conclusions public, not even the judges are allowed to know about
them, so that all we know about these earlier cases are just legends. But most of them did
involve absolute acquittals, you can believe that, but they can't be proved. On the other hand,
you shouldn't forget all about them either, I'm sure there is some truth to them, and they are
very beautiful, I've painted a few pictures myself depicting these legends." "My assessment
71
will not be altered by mere legends," said K. "I don't suppose it's possible to cite these
legends in court, is it?" The painter laughed. "No, you can't cite them in court," he said.
"Then there's no point in talking about them," said K., he wanted, for the time being, to
accept anything the painter told him, even if he thought it unlikely or contradicted what he
had been told by others. He did not now have the time to examine the truth of everything the
painter said or even to disprove it, he would have achieved as much as he could if the painter
would help him in any way even if his help would not be decisive. As a result, he said, "So
let's pay no more attention to absolute acquittal, but you mentioned two other possibilities."
"Apparent acquittal and deferment. They're the only possibilities," said the painter. "But
before we talk about them, would you not like to take your coat off? You must be hot."
"Yes," said K., who until then had paid attention to nothing but the painter's explanations, but
now that he had had the heat pointed out to him his brow began to sweat heavily. "It's almost
unbearable." The painter nodded as if he understood K.'s discomfort very well. "Could we not
open the window?" asked K. "No," said the painter. "It's only a fixed pane of glass, it can't be
opened." K. now realised that all this time he had been hoping the painter would suddenly go
over to the window and pull it open. He had prepared himself even for the fog that he would
breathe in through his open mouth. The thought that here he was entirely cut off from the air
made him feel dizzy. He tapped lightly on the bedspread beside him and, with a weak voice,
said, "That is very inconvenient and unhealthy." "Oh no," said the painter in defence of his
window, "as it can't be opened this room retains the heat better than if the window were
double glazed, even though it's only a single pane. There's not much need to air the room as
there's so much ventilation through the gaps in the wood, but when I do want to I can open
one of my doors, or even both of them." K. was slightly consoled by this explanation and
looked around to see where the second door was. The painter saw him do so and said, "It's
behind you, I had to hide it behind the bed." Only then was K. able to see the little door in the
wall. "It's really much too small for a studio here," said the painter, as if he wanted to
anticipate an objection K. would make. "I had to arrange things as well as I could. That's
obviously a very bad place for the bed, in front of the door. For instance when the judge I'm
painting at present comes he always comes through the door by the bed, and I've even given
him a key to this door so that he can wait for me here in the studio when I'm not home.
Although nowadays he usually comes early in the morning when I'm still asleep. And of
course, it always wakes me up when I hear the door opened beside the bed, however fast
asleep I am. If you could hear the way I curse him as he climbs over my bed in the morning
you'd lose all respect for judges. I suppose I could take the key away from him but that'd only
make things worse. It only takes a tiny effort to break any of the doors here off their hinges."
All the time the painter was speaking, K. was considering whether he should take off his coat,
but he finally realised that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable to stay here any
longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on his knee so that he could put it back on
again as soon as the conversation was over. He had hardly done this when one of the girls
called out, "Now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressing around the
gaps in the planks to see the spectacle for themselves. "The girls think I'm going to paint your
portrait," said the painter, "and that's why you're taking your coat off." "I see," said K., only
slightly amused by this, as he felt little better than he had before even though he now sat in
his shirtsleeves. With some irritation he asked, "What did you say the two other possibilities
were?" He had already forgotten the terms used. "Apparent acquittal and deferment," said the
painter. "It's up to you which one you choose. You can get either of them if I help you, but
it'll take some effort of course, the difference between them is that apparent acquittal needs
concentrated effort for a while and that deferment takes much less effort but it has to be
sustained. Now then, apparent acquittal. If that's what you want I'll write down an assertion of
your innocence on a piece of paper. The text for an assertion of this sort was passed down to
72
me from my father and it's quite unassailable. I take this assertion round to the judges I know.
So I'll start off with the one I'm currently painting, and put the assertion to him when he
comes for his sitting this evening. I'll lay the assertion in front of him, explain that you're
innocent and give him my personal guarantee of it. And that's not just a superficial guarantee,
it's a real one and it's binding." The painter's eyes seemed to show some reproach of K. for
wanting to impose that sort of responsibility on him. "That would be very kind of you," said
K. "And would the judge then believe you and nonetheless not pass an absolute acquittal?"
"It's like I just said," answered the painter. "And anyway, it's not entirely sure that all the
judges would believe me, many of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see
them personally. So then you'd have to come along too. But at least then, if that happens, the
matter is half way won, especially as I'd teach you in advance exactly how you'd need to act
with the judge concerned, of course. What also happens, though, is that there are some judges
who'll turn me down in advance, and that's worse. I'll certainly make several attempts, but
still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least we can afford to do that as no one judge can
pass the decisive verdict. Then when I've got enough judges' signatures on this document I
take it to the judge who's concerned with your case. I might even have his signature already,
in which case things develop a bit quicker than they would do otherwise. But there aren't
usually many hold ups from then on, and that's the time that the defendant can feel most
confident. It's odd, but true, that people feel more confidence in this time than they do after
they've been acquitted. There's no particular exertion needed now. When he has the document
asserting the defendant's innocence, guaranteed by a number of other judges, the judge can
acquit you without any worries, and although there are still several formalities to be gone
through there's no doubt that that's what he'll do as a favour to me and several other
acquaintances. You, however, walk out the court and you're free." "So, then I'll be free," said
K., hesitantly. "That's right," said the painter, "but only apparently free or, to put it a better
way, temporarily free, as the most junior judges, the ones I know, they don't have the right to
give the final acquittal. Only the highest judge can do that, in the court that's quite out of
reach for you, for me and for all of us. We don't know how things look there and,
incidentally, we don't want to know. The right to acquit people is a major privilege and our
judges don't have it, but they do have the right to free people from the indictment. That's to
say, if they're freed in this way then for the time being the charge is withdrawn but it's still
hanging over their heads and it only takes an order from higher up to bring it back into force.
And as I'm in such good contact with the court I can also tell you how the difference between
absolute and apparent acquittal is described, just in a superficial way, in the directives to the
court offices. If there's an absolute acquittal all proceedings should stop, everything
disappears from the process, not just the indictment but the trial and even the acquittal
disappears, everything just disappears. With an apparent acquittal it's different. When that
happens, nothing has changed except that the case for your innocence, for your acquittal and
the grounds for the acquittal have been made stronger. Apart from that, proceedings go on as
before, the court offices continue their business and the case gets passed to higher courts, gets
passed back down to the lower courts and so on, backwards and forwards, sometimes faster,
sometimes slower, to and fro. It's impossible to know exactly what's happening while this is
going on. Seen from outside it can sometimes seem that everything has been long since
forgotten, the documents have been lost and the acquittal is complete. No-one familiar with
the court would believe it. No documents ever get lost, the court forgets nothing. One day—
no-one expects it—some judge or other picks up the documents and looks more closely at
them, he notices that this particular case is still active, and orders the defendant's immediate
arrest. I've been talking here as if there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and rearrest, that is quite possible and I do know of cases like that, but it's just as likely that the
defendant goes home after he's been acquitted and finds somebody there waiting to re-arrest
73
him. Then, of course, his life as a free man is at an end." "And does the trial start over again?"
asked K., finding it hard to believe. "The trial will always start over again," said the painter,
"but there is, once again as before, the possibility of getting an apparent acquittal. Once
again, the accused has to muster all his strength and mustn't give up." The painter said that
last phrase possibly as a result of the impression that K., whose shoulders had dropped
somewhat, gave on him. "But to get a second acquittal," asked K., as if in anticipation of
further revelations by the painter, "is that not harder to get than the first time?" "As far as
that's concerned," answered the painter, "there's nothing you can say for certain. You mean,
do you, that the second arrest would have an adverse influence on the judge and the verdict
he passes on the defendant. That's not how it happens. When the acquittal is passed the
judges are already aware that re-arrest is likely. So when it happens it has hardly any effect.
But there are countless other reasons why the judges' mood and their legal acumen in the case
can be altered, and efforts to obtain the second acquittal must therefore be suited to the new
conditions, and generally just as vigorous as the first." "But this second acquittal will once
again not be final," said K., shaking his head. "Of course not," said the painter, "the second
acquittal is followed by the third arrest, the third acquittal by the fourth arrest and so on.
That's what is meant by the term apparent acquittal." K. was silent. "You clearly don't think
an apparent acquittal offers much advantage," said the painter, "perhaps deferment would suit
you better. Would you like me to explain what deferment is about?" K. nodded. The painter
had leant back and spread himself out in his chair, his nightshirt was wide open, he had
pushed his hand inside and was stroking his breast and his sides. "Deferment," said the
painter, looking vaguely in front of himself for a while as if trying to find a perfectly
appropriate explanation, "deferment consists of keeping proceedings permanently in their
earliest stages. To do that, the accused and those helping him need to keep in continuous
personal contact with the court, especially those helping him. I repeat, this doesn't require so
much effort as getting an apparent acquittal, but it probably requires a lot more attention. You
must never let the trial out of your sight, you have to go and see the appropriate judge at
regular intervals as well as when something in particular comes up and, whatever you do, you
have to try and remain friendly with him; if you don't know the judge personally you have to
influence him through the judges you do know, and you have to do it without giving up on
the direct discussions. As long as you don't fail to do any of these things you can be
reasonably sure the trial won't get past its first stages. The trial doesn't stop, but the defendant
is almost as certain of avoiding conviction as if he'd been acquitted. Compared with an
apparent acquittal, deferment has the advantage that the defendant's future is less uncertain,
he's safe from the shock of being suddenly re-arrested and doesn't need to fear the exertions
and stress involved in getting an apparent acquittal just when everything else in his life would
make it most difficult. Deferment does have certain disadvantages of its own though, too, and
they shouldn't be under-estimated. I don't mean by this that the defendant is never free, he's
never free in the proper sense of the word with an apparent acquittal either. There's another
disadvantage. Proceedings can't be prevented from moving forward unless there are some at
least ostensible reasons given. So something needs to seem to be happening when looked at
from the outside. This means that from time to time various injunctions have to be obeyed,
the accused has to be questioned, investigations have to take place and so on. The trial's been
artificially constrained inside a tiny circle, and it has to be continuously spun round within it.
And that, of course, brings with it certain unpleasantnesses for the accused, although you
shouldn't imagine they're all that bad. All of this is just for show, the interrogations, for
instance, they're only very short, if you ever don't have the time or don't feel like going to
them you can offer an excuse, with some judges you can even arrange the injunctions
together a long time in advance, in essence all it means is that, as the accused, you have to
report to the judge from time to time." Even while the painter was speaking those last words
74
K. had laid his coat over his arm and had stood up. Immediately, from outside the door, there
was a cry of "He's standing up now!" "Are you leaving already?" asked the painter, who had
also stood up. "It must be the air that's driving you out. I'm very sorry about that. There's still
a lot I need to tell you. I had to put everything very briefly but I hope at least it was all clear."
"Oh yes," said K., whose head was aching from the effort of listening. Despite this
affirmation the painter summed it all up once more, as if he wanted to give K. something to
console him on his way home. "Both have in common that they prevent the defendant being
convicted," he said. "But they also prevent his being properly acquitted," said K. quietly, as if
ashamed to acknowledge it. "You've got it, in essence," said the painter quickly. K. placed his
hand on his winter overcoat but could not bring himself to put it on. Most of all he would
have liked to pack everything together and run out to the fresh air. Not even the girls could
induce him to put his coat on, even though they were already loudly telling each other that he
was doing so. The painter still had to interpret K.'s mood in some way, so he said, "I expect
you've deliberately avoided deciding between my suggestions yet. That's good. I would even
have advised against making a decision straight away. There's no more than a hair's breadth
of difference between the advantages and disadvantages. Everything has to be carefully
weighed up. But the most important thing is you shouldn't lose too much time." "I'll come
back here again soon," said K., who had suddenly decided to put his frock coat on, threw his
overcoat over his shoulder and hurried over to the door behind which the girls now began to
scream. K. thought he could even see the screaming girls through the door. "Well, you'll have
to keep your word," said the painter, who had not followed him, "otherwise I'll come to the
bank to ask about it myself." "Will you open this door for me," said K. pulling at the handle
which, as he noticed from the resistance, was being held tightly by the girls on the other side.
"Do you want to be bothered by the girls?" asked the painter. "It's better if you use the other
way out," he said, pointing to the door behind the bed. K. agreed to this and jumped back to
the bed. But instead of opening that door the painter crawled under the bed and from
underneath it asked K., "Just a moment more, would you not like to see a picture I could sell
to you?" K. did not want to be impolite, the painter really had taken his side and promised to
help him more in the future, and because of K.'s forgetfulness there had been no mention of
any payment for the painter's help, so K. could not turn him down now and allowed him to
show him the picture, even though he was quivering with impatience to get out of the studio.
From under the bed, the painter withdrew a pile of unframed paintings. They were so covered
in dust that when the painter tried to blow it off the one on top the dust swirled around in
front of K.'s eyes, robbing him of breath for some time. "Moorland landscape," said the
painter passing the picture to K. It showed two sickly trees, well separated from each other in
dark grass. In the background there was a multi-coloured sunset. "That's nice," said K. "I'll
buy it." K. expressed himself in this curt way without any thought, so he was glad when the
painter did not take this amiss and picked up a second painting from the floor. "This is a
counterpart to the first picture," said the painter. Perhaps it had been intended as a
counterpart, but there was not the slightest difference to be seen between it and the first
picture, there were the trees, there the grass and there the sunset. But this was of little
importance to K. "They are beautiful landscapes," he said, "I'll buy them both and hang them
in my office." "You seem to like this subject," said the painter, picking up a third painting,
"good job I've still got another, similar picture here." The picture though, was not similar,
rather it was exactly the same moorland landscape. The painter was fully exploiting this
opportunity to sell off his old pictures. "I'll take this one too," said K. "How much do the
three paintings cost?" "We can talk about that next time," said the painter. "You're in a hurry
now, and we'll still be in contact. And besides, I'm glad you like the paintings, I'll give you all
the paintings I've got down here. They're all moorland landscapes, I've painted a lot of
moorland landscapes. A lot of people don't like that sort of picture because they're too
75
gloomy, but there are others, and you're one of them, who love gloomy themes." But K. was
not in the mood to hear about the professional experiences of this painter cum beggar. "Wrap
them all up!" he called out, interrupting the painter as he was speaking, "my servant will
come to fetch them in the morning." "There's no need for that," said the painter. "I expect I
can find a porter for you who can go with you now." And, at last, he leant over the bed and
unlocked the door. "Just step on the bed, don't worry about that," said the painter, "that's what
everyone does who comes in here." Even without this invitation, K. had shown no
compunction in already placing his foot in the middle of the bed covers, then he looked out
through the open door and drew his foot back again. "What is that?" he asked the painter.
"What are you so surprised at?" he asked, surprised in his turn. "Those are court offices.
Didn't you know there are court offices here. There are court offices in almost every attic,
why should this building be any different? Even my studio is actually one of the court offices
but the court put it at my disposal." It was not so much finding court offices even here that
shocked K., he was mainly shocked at himself, at his own naïvety in court matters. It seemed
to him that one of the most basic rules governing how a defendant should behave was always
to be prepared, never allow surprises, never to look, unsuspecting, to the right when the judge
stood beside him to his left—and this was the very basic rule that he was continually
violating. A long corridor extended in front of him, air blew in from it which, compared with
the air in the studio, was refreshing. There were benches set along each side of the corridor
just as in the waiting area for the office he went to himself. There seemed to be precise rules
governing how offices should be equipped. There did not seem to be many people visiting the
offices that day. There was a man there, half sitting, half laying, his face was buried in his
arm on the bench and he seemed to be sleeping; another man was standing in the half-dark at
the end of the corridor. K. now climbed over the bed, the painter followed him with the
pictures. They soon came across a servant of the court—K. was now able to recognise all the
servants of the court from the gold buttons they wore on their civilian clothes below the
normal buttons—and the painter instructed him to go with K. carrying the pictures. K.
staggered more than he walked, his handkerchief pressed over his mouth. They had nearly
reached the exit when the girls stormed in on them, so K. had not been able to avoid them.
They had clearly seen that the second door of the studio had been opened and had gone
around to impose themselves on him from this side. "I can't come with you any further!"
called out the painter with a laugh as the girls pressed in. "Goodbye, and don't hesitate too
long!" K. did not even look round at him. Once on the street he took the first cab he came
across. He now had to get rid of the servant, whose gold button continually caught his eye
even if it caught no-one else's. As a servant, the servant of the court was going to sit on the
coach-box. But K. chased him down from there. It was already well into the afternoon when
K. arrived in front of the bank. He would have liked to leave the pictures in the cab but feared
there might be some occasion when he would have to let the painter see he still had them. So
he had the pictures taken to his office and locked them in the lowest drawer of his desk so
that he could at least keep them safe from the deputy director's view for the next few days.
76
Chapter VIII
Block, the businessman—Dismissing the lawyer
K. had at last made the decision to withdraw his defence from the lawyer. It was impossible
to remove his doubts as to whether this was the right decision, but this was outweighed by his
belief in its necessity. This decision, on the day he intended to go to see the lawyer, took a lot
of the strength he needed for his work, he worked exceptionally slowly, he had to remain in
his office a long time, and it was already past ten o'clock when he finally stood in front of the
lawyer's front door. Even before he rang he considered whether it might not be better to give
the lawyer notice by letter or telephone, a personal conversation would certainly be very
difficult. Nonetheless, K. did not actually want to do without it, if he gave notice by any other
means it would be received in silence or with a few formulated words, and unless Leni could
discover anything K. would never learn how the lawyer had taken his dismissal and what its
consequences might be, in the lawyer's not unimportant opinion. But sitting in front of him
and taken by surprise by his dismissal, K. would be able easily to infer everything he wanted
from the lawyer's face and behaviour, even if he could not be induced to say very much. It
was not even out of the question that K. might, after all, be persuaded that it would be best to
leave his defence to the lawyer and withdraw his dismissal.
As usual, there was at first no response to K.'s ring at the door. "Leni could be a bit quicker,"
thought K. But he could at least be glad there was nobody else interfering as usually
happened, be it the man in his nightshirt or anyone else who might bother him. As K. pressed
on the button for the second time he looked back at the other door, but this time it, too,
remained closed. At last, two eyes appeared at the spy-hatch in the lawyer's door, although
they weren't Leni's eyes. Someone unlocked the door, but kept himself pressed against it as
he called back inside, "It's him!", and only then did he open the door properly. K. pushed
against the door, as behind him he could already hear the key being hurriedly turned in the
lock of the door to the other flat. When the door in front of him finally opened, he stormed
straight into the hallway. Through the corridor which led between the rooms he saw Leni, to
whom the warning cry of the door opener had been directed, still running away in her
nightshirt. He looked at her for a moment and then looked round at the person who had
opened the door. It was a small, wizened man with a full beard, he held a candle in his hand.
"Do you work here?" asked K. "No," answered the man, "I don't belong here at all, the lawyer
is only representing me, I'm here on legal business." "Without your coat?" asked K.,
indicating the man's deficiency of dress with a gesture of his hand. "Oh, do forgive me!" said
the man, and he looked at himself in the light of the candle he was holding as if he had not
known about his appearance until then. "Is Leni your lover?" asked K. curtly. He had set his
legs slightly apart, his hands, in which he held his hat, were behind his back. Merely by being
in possession of a thick overcoat he felt his advantage over this thin little man. "Oh God," he
said and, shocked, raised one hand in front of his face as if in defence, "no, no, what can you
be thinking?" "You look honest enough," said K. with a smile, "but come along anyway." K.
indicated with his hat which way the man was to go and let him go ahead of him. "What is
your name then?" asked K. on the way. "Block. I'm a businessman," said the small man,
twisting himself round as he thus introduced himself, although K. did not allow him to stop
moving. "Is that your real name?" asked K. "Of course it is," was the man's reply, "why do
you doubt it?" "I thought you might have some reason to keep your name secret," said K. He
felt himself as much at liberty as is normally only felt in foreign parts when speaking with
people of lower standing, keeping everything about himself to himself, speaking only
77
casually about the interests of the other, able to raise him to a level above one's own, but also
able, at will, to let him drop again. K. stopped at the door of the lawyer's office, opened it
and, to the businessman who had obediently gone ahead, called, "Not so fast! Bring some
light here!" K. thought Leni might have hidden in here, he let the businessman search in
every corner, but the room was empty. In front of the picture of the judge K. took hold of the
businessman's braces to stop him moving on. "Do you know him?" he asked, pointing
upwards with his finger. The businessman lifted the candle, blinked as he looked up and said,
"It's a judge." "An important judge?" asked K., and stood to the side and in front of the
businessman so that he could observe what impression the picture had on him. The
businessman was looking up in admiration. "He's an important judge." "You don't have much
insight," said K. "He is the lowest of the lowest examining judges." "I remember now," said
the businessman as he lowered the candle, "that's what I've already been told." "Well of
course you have," called out K., "I'd forgotten about it, of course you would already have
been told." "But why, why?" asked the businessman as he moved forwards towards the door,
propelled by the hands of K. Outside in the corridor K. said, "You know where Leni's hidden,
do you?" "Hidden?" said the businessman, "No, but she might be in the kitchen cooking soup
for the lawyer." "Why didn't you say that immediately?" asked K. "I was going to take you
there, but you called me back again," answered the businessman, as if confused by the
contradictory commands. "You think you're very clever, don't you," said K., "now take me
there!" K. had never been in the kitchen, it was surprisingly big and very well equipped. The
stove alone was three times bigger than normal stoves, but it was not possible to see any
detail beyond this as the kitchen was at the time illuminated by no more than a small lamp
hanging by the entrance. At the stove stood Leni, in a white apron as always, breaking eggs
into a pot standing on a spirit lamp. "Good evening, Josef," she said with a glance sideways.
"Good evening," said K., pointing with one hand to a chair in a corner which the businessman
was to sit on, and he did indeed sit down on it. K. however went very close behind Leni's
back, leant over her shoulder and asked, "Who is this man?" Leni put one hand around K. as
she stirred the soup with the other, she drew him forward toward herself and said, "He's a
pitiful character, a poor businessman by the name of Block. Just look at him." The two of
them looked back over their shoulders. The businessman was sitting on the chair that K. had
directed him to, he had extinguished the candle whose light was no longer needed and
pressed on the wick with his fingers to stop the smoke. "You were in your nightshirt," said
K., putting his hand on her head and turning it back towards the stove. She was silent. "Is he
your lover?" asked K. She was about to take hold of the pot of soup, but K. took both her
hands and said, "Answer me!" She said, "Come into the office, I'll explain everything to
you." "No," said K., "I want you to explain it here." She put her arms around him and wanted
to kiss him. K., though, pushed her away and said, "I don't want you to kiss me now."
"Josef," said Leni, looking at K. imploringly but frankly in the eyes, "you're not going to be
jealous of Mr. Block now, are you. Rudi," she then said, turning to the businessman, "help me
out will you, I'm being suspected of something, you can see that, leave the candle alone." It
had looked as though Mr. Block had not been paying attention but he had been following
closely. "I don't even know why you might be jealous," he said ingenuously. "Nor do I,
actually," said K., looking at the businessman with a smile. Leni laughed out loud and while
K. was not paying attention took the opportunity of embracing him and whispering, "Leave
him alone, now, you can see what sort of person he is. I've been helping him a little bit
because he's an important client of the lawyer's, and no other reason. And what about you?
Do you want to speak to the lawyer at this time of day? He's very unwell today, but if you
want I'll tell him you're here. But you can certainly spend the night with me. It's so long since
you were last here, even the lawyer has been asking about you. Don't neglect your case! And
I've got some things to tell you that I've learned about. But now, before anything else, take
78
your coat off!" She helped him off with his coat, took the hat off his head, ran with the things
into the hallway to hang them up, then she ran back and saw to the soup. "Do you want me to
tell him you're here straight away or take him his soup first?" "Tell him I'm here first," said
K. He was in a bad mood, he had originally intended a detailed discussion of his business
with Leni, especially the question of his giving the lawyer notice, but now he no longer
wanted to because of the presence of the businessman. Now he considered his affair too
important to let this little businessman take part in it and perhaps change some of his
decisions, and so he called Leni back even though she was already on her way to the lawyer.
"Bring him his soup first," he said, "I want him to get his strength up for the discussion with
me, he'll need it." "You're a client of the lawyer's too, aren't you," said the businessman
quietly from his corner as if he were trying to find this out. It was not, however, taken well.
"What business is that of yours?" said K., and Leni said, "Will you be quiet.—I'll take him his
soup first then, shall I?" And she poured the soup into a dish. "The only worry then is that he
might go to sleep soon after he's eaten." "What I've got to say to him will keep him awake,"
said K., who still wanted to intimate that he intended some important negotiations with the
lawyer, he wanted Leni to ask him what it was and only then to ask her advice. But instead,
she just promptly carried out the order he had given her. When she went over to him with the
dish she deliberately brushed against him and whispered, "I'll tell him you're here as soon as
he's eaten the soup so that I can get you back as soon as possible." "Just go," said K., "just
go." "Be a bit more friendly," she said and, still holding the dish, turned completely round
once more in the doorway.
K. watched her as she went; the decision had finally been made that the lawyer was to be
dismissed, it was probably better that he had not been able to discuss the matter any more
with Leni beforehand; she hardly understood the complexity of the matter, she would
certainly have advised him against it and perhaps would even have prevented him from
dismissing the lawyer this time, he would have remained in doubt and unease and eventually
have carried out his decision after a while anyway as this decision was something he could
not avoid. The sooner it was carried out the more harm would be avoided. And moreover,
perhaps the businessman had something to say on the matter.
K. turned round, the businessman hardly noticed it as he was about to stand up. "Stay where
you are," said K. and pulled up a chair beside him. "Have you been a client of the lawyer's for
a long time?" asked K. "Yes," said the businessman, "a very long time." "How many years
has he been representing you so far, then?" asked K. "I don't know how you mean," said the
businessman, "he's been my business lawyer—I buy and sell cereals—he's been my business
lawyer since I took the business over, and that's about twenty years now, but perhaps you
mean my own trial and he's been representing me in that since it started, and that's been more
than five years. Yes, well over five years," he then added, pulling out an old briefcase, "I've
got everything written down; I can tell you the exact dates if you like. It's so hard to
remember everything. Probably, my trial's been going on much longer than that, it started
soon after the death of my wife, and that's been more than five and a half years now." K.
moved in closer to him. "So the lawyer takes on ordinary legal business, does he?" he asked.
This combination of criminal and commercial business seemed surprisingly reassuring for K.
"Oh yes," said the businessman, and then he whispered, "They even say he's more efficient in
jurisprudence than he is in other matters." But then he seemed to regret saying this, and he
laid a hand on K.'s shoulder and said, "Please don't betray me to him, will you." K. patted his
thigh to reassure him and said, "No, I don't betray people." "He can be so vindictive, you
see," said the businessman. "I'm sure he won't do anything against such a faithful client as
you," said K. "Oh, he might do," said the businessman, "when he gets cross it doesn't matter
who it is, and anyway, I'm not really faithful to him." "How's that then?" asked K. "I'm not
79
sure I should tell you about it," said the businessman hesitantly. "I think it'll be alright," said
K. "Well then," said the businessman, "I'll tell you about some of it, but you'll have to tell me
a secret too, then we can support each other with the lawyer." "You are very careful," said K.,
"but I'll tell you a secret that will set your mind completely at ease. Now tell me, in what way
have you been unfaithful to the lawyer?" "I've ..." said the businessman hesitantly, and in a
tone as if he were confessing something dishonourable, "I've taken on other lawyers besides
him." "That's not so serious," said K., a little disappointed. "It is, here," said the businessman,
who had had some difficulty breathing since making his confession but who now, after
hearing K.'s comment, began to feel more trust for him. "That's not allowed. And it's allowed
least of all to take on petty lawyers when you've already got a proper one. And that's just
what I have done, besides him I've got five petty lawyers." "Five!" exclaimed K., astonished
at this number, "Five lawyers besides this one?" The businessman nodded. "I'm even
negotiating with a sixth one." "But why do you need so many lawyers?" asked K. "I need all
of them," said the businessman. "Would you mind explaining that to me?" asked K. "I'd be
glad to," said the businessman. "Most of all, I don't want to lose my case, well that's obvious.
So that means I mustn't neglect anything that might be of use to me; even if there's very little
hope of a particular thing being of any use I can't just throw it away. So everything I have I've
put to use in my case. I've taken all the money out of my business, for example, the offices
for my business used to occupy nearly a whole floor, but now all I need is a little room at the
back where I work with one apprentice. It wasn't just using up the money that caused the
difficulty, of course, it was much more to do with me not working at the business as much as
I used to. If you want to do something about your trial you don't have much time for anything
else." "So you're also working at the court yourself?" asked K. "That's just what I want to
learn more about." "I can't tell you very much about that," said the businessman, "at first I
tried to do that too but I soon had to give it up again. It wears you out too much, and it's
really not much use. And it turned out to be quite impossible to work there yourself and to
negotiate, at least for me it was. It's a heavy strain there just sitting and waiting. You know
yourself what the air is like in those offices." "How do you know I've been there, then?"
asked K. "I was in the waiting room myself when you went through." "What a coincidence
that is!" exclaimed K., totally engrossed and forgetting how ridiculous the businessman had
seemed to him earlier. "So you saw me! You were in the waiting room when I went through.
Yes, I did go through it one time." "It isn't such a big coincidence," said the businessman,
"I'm there nearly every day." "I expect I'll have to go there quite often myself now," said K.,
"although I can hardly expect to be shown the same respect as I was then. They all stood up
for me. They must have thought I was a judge." "No," said the businessman, "we were
greeting the servant of the court. We knew you were a defendant. That sort of news spreads
very quickly." "So you already knew about that," said K., "the way I behaved must have
seemed very arrogant to you. Did you criticise me for it afterwards?" "No," said the
businessman, "quite the opposite. That was just stupidity." "What do you mean, 'stupidity'?"
asked K. "Why are you asking about it?" said the businessman in some irritation. "You still
don't seem to know the people there and you might take it wrong. Don't forget in proceedings
like this there are always lots of different things coming up to talk about, things that you just
can't understand with reason alone, you just get too tired and distracted for most things and
so, instead, people rely on superstition. I'm talking about the others, but I'm no better myself.
One of these superstitions, for example, is that you can learn a lot about the outcome of a
defendant's case by looking at his face, especially the shape of his lips. There are lots who
believe that, and they said they could see from the shape of your lips that you'd definitely be
found guilty very soon. I repeat that all this is just a ridiculous superstition, and in most cases
it's completely disproved by the facts, but when you live in that society it's hard to hold
yourself back from beliefs like that. Just think how much effect that superstition can have.
80
You spoke to one of them there, didn't you? He was hardly able to give you an answer. There
are lots of things there that can make you confused, of course, but one of them, for him, was
the appearance of your lips. He told us all later he thought he could see something in your
lips that meant he'd be convicted himself." "On my lips?" asked K., pulling out a pocket
mirror and examining himself. "I can see nothing special about my lips. Can you?" "Nor can
I," said the businessman, "nothing at all." "These people are so superstitious!" exclaimed K.
"Isn't that what I just told you?" asked the businessman. "Do you then have that much contact
with each other, exchanging each other's opinions?" said K. "I've kept myself completely
apart so far." "They don't normally have much contact with each other," said the
businessman, "that would be impossible, there are so many of them. And they don't have
much in common either. If a group of them ever thinks they have found something in
common it soon turns out they were mistaken. There's nothing you can do as a group where
the court's concerned. Each case is examined separately, the court is very painstaking. So
there's nothing to be achieved by forming into a group, only sometimes an individual will
achieve something in secret; and it's only when that's been done the others learn about it;
nobody knows how it was done. So there's no sense of togetherness, you meet people now
and then in the waiting rooms, but we don't talk much there. The superstitious beliefs were
established a long time ago and they spread all by themselves." "I saw those gentlemen in the
waiting room," said K., "it seemed so pointless for them to be waiting in that way." "Waiting
is not pointless," said the businessman, "it's only pointless if you try and interfere yourself. I
told you just now I've got five lawyers besides this one. You might think—I thought it myself
at first—you might think I could leave the whole thing entirely up to them now. That would
be entirely wrong. I can leave it up to them less than when I had just the one. Maybe you
don't understand that, do you?" "No," said K., and to slow the businessman down, who had
been speaking too fast, he laid his hand on the businessman's to reassure him, "but I'd like
just to ask you to speak a little more slowly, these are many very important things for me, and
I can't follow exactly what you're saying." "You're quite right to remind me of that," said the
businessman, "you're new to all this, a junior. Your trial is six months old, isn't it. Yes, I've
heard about it. Such a new case! But I've already thought all these things through countless
times, to me they're the most obvious things in the world." "You must be glad your trial has
already progressed so far, are you?" asked K., he did not wish to ask directly how the
businessman's affairs stood, but received no clear answer anyway. "Yes, I've been working at
my trial for five years now," said the businessman as his head sank, "that's no small
achievement." Then he was silent for a while. K. listened to hear whether Leni was on her
way back. On the one hand he did not want her to come back too soon as he still had many
questions to ask and did not want her to find him in this intimate discussion with the
businessman, but on the other hand it irritated him that she stayed so long with the lawyer
when K. was there, much longer than she needed to give him his soup. "I still remember it
exactly," the businessman began again, and K. immediately gave him his full attention,
"when my case was as old as yours is now. I only had this one lawyer at that time but I wasn't
very satisfied with him." Now I'll find out everything, thought K., nodding vigorously as if he
could thereby encourage the businessman to say everything worth knowing. "My case," the
businessman continued, "didn't move on at all, there were some hearings that took place and I
went to every one of them, collected materials, handed all my business books to the court—
which I later found was entirely unnecessary—I ran back and forth to the lawyer, and he
submitted various documents to the court too...." "Various documents?" asked K. "Yes, that's
right," said the businessman. "That's very important for me," said K., "in my case he's still
working on the first set of documents. He still hasn't done anything. I see now that he's been
neglecting me quite disgracefully." "There can be lots of good reasons why the first
documents still aren't ready," said the businessman, "and anyway, it turned out later on that
81
the ones he submitted for me were entirely worthless. I even read one of them myself, one of
the officials at the court was very helpful. It was very learned, but it didn't actually say
anything. Most of all, there was lots of Latin, which I can't understand, then pages and pages
of general appeals to the court, then lots of flattery for particular officials, they weren't
named, these officials, but anyone familiar with the court must have been able to guess who
they were, then there was self-praise by the lawyer where he humiliated himself to the court
in a way that was downright dog-like, and then endless investigations of cases from the past
which were supposed to be similar to mine. Although, as far as I was able to follow them,
these investigations had been carried out very carefully. Now, I don't mean to criticise the
lawyer's work with all of this, and the document I read was only one of many, but even so,
and this is something I will say, at that time I couldn't see any progress in my trial at all."
"And what sort of progress had you been hoping for?" asked K. "That's a very sensible
question," said the businessman with a smile, "it's only very rare that you see any progress in
these proceedings at all. But I didn't know that then. I'm a businessman, much more in those
days than now, I wanted to see some tangible progress, it should have all been moving to
some conclusion or at least should have been moving on in some way according to the rules.
Instead of which there were just more hearings, and most of them went through the same
things anyway; I had all the answers off pat like in a church service; there were messengers
from the court coming to me at work several times a week, or they came to me at home or
anywhere else they could find me; and that was very disturbing of course (but at least now
things are better in that respect, it's much less disturbing when they contact you by
telephone), and rumours about my trial even started to spread among some of the people I do
business with, and especially my relations, so I was being made to suffer in many different
ways but there was still not the slightest sign that even the first hearing would take place
soon. So I went to the lawyer and complained about it. He explained it all to me at length, but
refused to do anything I asked for, no-one has any influence on the way the trial proceeds, he
said, to try and insist on it in any of the documents submitted—like I was asking—was
simply unheard of and would do harm to both him and me. I thought to myself: What this
lawyer can't or won't do another lawyer will. So I looked round for other lawyers. And before
you say anything: none of them asked for a definite date for the main trial and none of them
got one, and anyway, apart from one exception which I'll talk about in a minute, it really is
impossible, that's one thing this lawyer didn't mislead me about; but besides, I had no reason
to regret turning to other lawyers. Perhaps you've already heard how Dr. Huld talks about the
petty lawyers, he probably made them sound very contemptible to you, and he's right, they
are contemptible. But when he talks about them and compares them with himself and his
colleagues there's a small error running through what he says, and, just for your interest, I'll
tell you about it. When he talks about the lawyers he mixes with he sets them apart by calling
them the 'great lawyers'. That's wrong, anyone can call himself 'great' if he wants to, of
course, but in this case only the usage of the court can make that distinction. You see, the
court says that besides the petty lawyers there are also minor lawyers and great lawyers. This
one and his colleagues are only minor lawyers, and the difference in rank between them and
the great lawyers, who I've only ever heard about and never seen, is incomparably greater
than between the minor lawyers and the despised petty lawyers." "The great lawyers?" asked
K. "Who are they then? How do you contact them?" "You've never heard about them, then?"
said the businessman. "There's hardly anyone who's been accused who doesn't spend a lot of
time dreaming about the great lawyers once he's heard about them. It's best if you don't let
yourself be misled in that way. I don't know who the great lawyers are, and there's probably
no way of contacting them. I don't know of any case I can talk about with certainty where
they've taken any part. They do defend a lot of people, but you can't get hold of them by your
own efforts, they only defend those who they want to defend. And I don't suppose they ever
82
take on cases that haven't already got past the lower courts. Anyway, it's best not to think
about them, as if you do it makes the discussions with the other lawyers, all their advice and
all that they do manage to achieve, seem so unpleasant and useless, I had that experience
myself, just wanted to throw everything away and lay at home in bed and hear nothing more
about it. But that, of course, would be the stupidest thing you could do, and you wouldn't be
left in peace in bed for very long either." "So you weren't thinking about the great lawyers at
that time?" asked K. "Not for very long," said the businessman, and smiled again, "you can't
forget about them entirely, I'm afraid, especially in the night when these thoughts come so
easily. But I wanted immediate results in those days, so I went to the petty lawyers."
"Well look at you two sat huddled together!" called Leni as she came back with the dish and
stood in the doorway. They were indeed sat close together, if either of them turned his head
even slightly it would have knocked against the other's, the businessman was not only very
small but also sat hunched down, so that K. was also forced to bend down low if he wanted to
hear everything. "Not quite yet!" called out K., to turn Leni away, his hand, still resting on
the businessman's hand, twitching with impatience. "He wanted me to tell him about my
trial," said the businessman to Leni. "Carry on, then, carry on," she said. She spoke to the
businessman with affection but, at the same time, with condescension. K. did not like that, he
had begun to learn that the man was of some value after all, he had experience at least, and he
was willing to share it. Leni was probably wrong about him. He watched her in irritation as
Leni now took the candle from the businessman's hand—which he had been holding on to all
this time—wiped his hand with her apron and then knelt beside him to scratch off some wax
that had dripped from the candle onto his trousers. "You were about to tell me about the petty
lawyers," said K., shoving Leni's hand away with no further comment. "What's wrong with
you today?" asked Leni, tapped him gently and carried on with what she had been doing.
"Yes, the petty lawyers," said the businessman, putting his hand to his brow as if thinking
hard. K. wanted to help him and said, "You wanted immediate results and so went to the
petty lawyers." "Yes, that's right," said the businessman, but did not continue with what he'd
been saying. "Maybe he doesn't want to speak about it in front of Leni," thought K.,
suppressing his impatience to hear the rest straight away, and stopped trying to press him.
"Have you told him I'm here?" he asked Leni. "Course I have," she said, "he's waiting for
you. Leave Block alone now, you can talk to Block later, he'll still be here." K. still hesitated.
"You'll still be here?" he asked the businessman, wanting to hear the answer from him and
not wanting Leni to speak about the businessman as if he weren't there, he was full of secret
resentment towards Leni today. And once more it was only Leni who answered. "He often
sleeps here." "He sleeps here?" exclaimed K., he had thought the businessman would just
wait there for him while he quickly settled his business with the lawyer, and then they would
leave together to discuss everything thoroughly and undisturbed. "Yes," said Leni, "not
everyone's like you, Josef, allowed to see the lawyer at any time you like. Don't even seem
surprised that the lawyer, despite being ill, still receives you at eleven o'clock at night. You
take it far too much for granted, what your friends do for you. Well, your friends, or at least I
do, we like to do things for you. I don't want or need any more thanks than that you're fond of
me." "Fond of you?" thought K. at first, and only then it occurred to him, "Well, yes, I am
fond of her." Nonetheless, what he said, forgetting all the rest, was, "He receives me because
I am his client. If I needed anyone else's help I'd have to beg and show gratitude whenever I
do anything." "He's really nasty today, isn't he?" Leni asked the businessman. "Now it's me
who's not here," thought K., and nearly lost his temper with the businessman when, with the
same rudeness as Leni, he said, "The lawyer also has other reasons to receive him. His case is
much more interesting than mine. And it's only in its early stages too, it probably hasn't
progressed very far so the lawyer still likes to deal with him. That'll all change later on."
83
"Yeah, yeah," said Leni, looking at the businessman and laughing. "He doesn't half talk!" she
said, turning to face K. "You can't believe a word he says. He's as talkative as he is sweet.
Maybe that's why the lawyer can't stand him. At least, he only sees him when he's in the right
mood. I've already tried hard to change that but it's impossible. Just think, there are times
when I tell him Block's here and he doesn't receive him until three days later. And if Block
isn't on the spot when he's called then everything's lost and it all has to start all over again.
That's why I let Block sleep here, it wouldn't be the first time Dr. Huld has wanted to see him
in the night. So now Block is ready for that. Sometimes, when he knows Block is still here,
he'll even change his mind about letting him in to see him." K. looked questioningly at the
businessman. The latter nodded and, although he had spoken quite openly with K. earlier,
seemed to be confused with shame as he said, "Yes, later on you become very dependent on
your lawyer." "He's only pretending to mind," said Leni. "He likes to sleep here really, he's
often said so." She went over to a little door and shoved it open. "Do you want to see his
bedroom?" she asked. K. went over to the low, windowless room and looked in from the
doorway. The room contained a narrow bed which filled it completely, so that to get into the
bed you would need to climb over the bedpost. At the head of the bed there was a niche in the
wall where, fastidiously tidy, stood a candle, a bottle of ink, and a pen with a bundle of
papers which were probably to do with the trial. "You sleep in the maid's room?" asked K., as
he went back to the businessman. "Leni's let me have it," answered the businessman, "it has
many advantages." K. looked long at him; his first impression of the businessman had
perhaps not been right; he had experience as his trial had already lasted a long time, but he
had paid a heavy price for this experience. K. was suddenly unable to bear the sight of the
businessman any longer. "Bring him to bed, then!" he called out to Leni, who seemed to
understand him. For himself, he wanted to go to the lawyer and, by dismissing him, free
himself from not only the lawyer but also from Leni and the businessman. But before he had
reached the door the businessman spoke to him gently. "Excuse me, sir," he said, and K.
looked round crossly. "You've forgotten your promise," said the businessman, stretching his
hand out to K. imploringly from where he sat. "You were going to tell me a secret." "That is
true," said K., as he glanced at Leni, who was watching him carefully, to check on her. "So
listen; it's hardly a secret now anyway. I'm going to see the lawyer now to sack him." "He's
sacking him!" yelled the businessman, and he jumped up from his chair and ran around the
kitchen with his arms in the air. He kept on shouting, "He's sacking his lawyer!" Leni tried to
rush at K. but the businessman got in her way so that she shoved him away with her fists.
Then, still with her hands balled into fists, she ran after K. who, however, had been given a
long start. He was already inside the lawyer's room by the time Leni caught up with him. He
had almost closed the door behind himself, but Leni held the door open with her foot,
grabbed his arm and tried to pull him back. But he put such pressure on her wrist that, with a
sigh, she was forced to release him. She did not dare go into the room straight away, and K.
locked the door with the key.
"I've been waiting for you a very long time," said the lawyer from his bed. He had been
reading something by the light of a candle but now he laid it onto the bedside table and put
his glasses on, looking at K. sharply through them. Instead of apologising K. said, "I'll be
leaving again soon." As he had not apologised the lawyer ignored what K. said, and replied,
"I won't let you in this late again next time." "I find that quite acceptable," said K. The lawyer
looked at him quizzically. "Sit down," he said. "As you wish," said K., drawing a chair up to
the bedside table and sitting down. "It seemed to me that you locked the door," said the
lawyer. "Yes," said K., "it was because of Leni." He had no intention of letting anyone off
lightly. But the lawyer asked him, "Was she being importunate again?" "Importunate?" asked
K. "Yes," said the lawyer, laughing as he did so, had a fit of coughing and then, once it had
passed, began to laugh again. "I'm sure you must have noticed how importunate she can be
84
sometimes," he said, and patted K.'s hand which K. had rested on the bedside table and which
he now snatched back. "You don't attach much importance to it, then," said the lawyer when
K. was silent, "so much the better. Otherwise I might have needed to apologise to you. It is a
peculiarity of Leni's. I've long since forgiven her for it, and I wouldn't be talking of it now, if
you hadn't locked the door just now. Anyway, perhaps I should at least explain this
peculiarity of hers to you, but you seem rather disturbed, the way you're looking at me, and
so that's why I'll do it, this peculiarity of hers consists in this: Leni finds most of the accused
attractive. She attaches herself to each of them, loves each of them, even seems to be loved
by each of them; then she sometimes entertains me by telling me about them when I allow
her to. I am not so astonished by all of this as you seem to be. If you look at them in the right
way the accused really can be attractive, quite often. But that is a remarkable and to some
extent scientific phenomenon. Being indicted does not cause any clear, precisely definable
change in a person's appearance, of course. But it's not like with other legal matters, most of
them remain in their usual way of life and, if they have a good lawyer looking after them, the
trial doesn't get in their way. But there are nonetheless those who have experience in these
matters who can look at a crowd, however big, and tell you which among them is facing a
charge. How can they do that, you will ask? My answer will not please you. It is simply that
those who are facing a charge are the most attractive. It cannot be their guilt that makes them
attractive as not all of them are guilty—at least that's what I, as a lawyer, have to say—and
nor can it be the proper punishment that has made them attractive as not all of them are
punished, so it can only be that the proceedings levelled against them take some kind of hold
on them. Whatever the reason, some of these attractive people are indeed very attractive. But
all of them are attractive, even Block, pitiful worm that he is." As the lawyer finished what he
was saying, K. was fully in control of himself, he had even nodded conspicuously at his last
few words in order to confirm to himself the view he had already formed: that the lawyer was
trying to confuse him, as he always did, by making general and irrelevant observations, and
thus distract him from the main question of what he was actually doing for K.'s trial. The
lawyer must have noticed that K. was offering him more resistance than before, as he became
silent, giving K. the chance to speak himself, and then, as K. also remained silent, he asked,
"Did you have a particular reason for coming to see me today?" "Yes," said K., putting his
hand up to slightly shade his eyes from the light of the candle so that he could see the lawyer
better, "I wanted to tell you that I'm withdrawing my representation from you, with
immediate effect." "Do I understand you rightly?" asked the lawyer as he half raised himself
in his bed and supported himself with one hand on the pillow. "I think you do," said K.,
sitting stiffly upright as if waiting in ambush. "Well we can certainly discuss this plan of
yours," said the lawyer after a pause. "It's not a plan any more," said K. "That may be," said
the lawyer, "but we still mustn't rush anything." He used the word 'we', as if he had no
intention of letting K. go free, and as if, even if he could no longer represent him, he could
still at least continue as his adviser. "Nothing is being rushed," said K., standing slowly up
and going behind his chair, "everything has been well thought out and probably even for too
long. The decision is final." "Then allow me to say a few words," said the lawyer, throwing
the bed cover to one side and sitting on the edge of the bed. His naked, white-haired legs
shivered in the cold. He asked K. to pass him a blanket from the couch. K. passed him the
blanket and said, "You are running the risk of catching cold for no reason." "The
circumstances are important enough," said the lawyer as he wrapped the bed cover around the
top half of his body and then the blanket around his legs. "Your uncle is my friend and in the
course of time I've become fond of you as well. I admit that quite openly. There's nothing in
that for me to be ashamed of." It was very unwelcome for K. to hear the old man speak in this
touching way, as it forced him to explain himself more fully, which he would rather have
avoided, and he was aware that it also confused him even though it could never make him
85
reverse his decision. "Thank you for feeling so friendly toward me," he said, "and I also
realise how deeply involved you've been in my case, as deeply as possible for yourself and to
bring as much advantage as possible to me. Nonetheless, I have recently come to the
conviction that it is not enough. I would naturally never attempt, considering that you are so
much older and more experienced than I am, to convince you of my opinion; if I have ever
unintentionally done so then I beg your forgiveness, but, as you have just said yourself, the
circumstances are important enough and it is my belief that my trial needs to be approached
with much more vigour than has so far been the case." "I see," said the lawyer, "you've
become impatient." "I am not impatient," said K., with some irritation and he stopped paying
so much attention to his choice of words. "When I first came here with my uncle you
probably noticed I wasn't greatly concerned about my case, and if I wasn't reminded of it by
force, as it were, I would forget about it completely. But my uncle insisted I should allow you
to represent me and I did so as a favour to him. I could have expected the case to be less of a
burden than it had been, as the point of taking on a lawyer is that he should take on some of
its weight. But what actually happened was the opposite. Before, the trial was never such a
worry for me as it has been since you've been representing me. When I was by myself I never
did anything about my case, I was hardly aware of it, but then, once there was someone
representing me, everything was set for something to happen, I was always, without cease,
waiting for you to do something, getting more and more tense, but you did nothing. I did get
some information about the court from you that I probably could not have got anywhere else,
but that can't be enough when the trial, supposedly in secret, is getting closer and closer to
me." K. had pushed the chair away and stood erect, his hands in the pockets of his frock coat.
"After a certain point in the proceedings," said the lawyer quietly and calmly, "nothing new
of any importance ever happens. So many litigants, at the same stage in their trials, have
stood before me just like you are now and spoken in the same way." "Then these other
litigants," said K., "have all been right, just as I am. That does not show that I'm not." "I
wasn't trying to show that you were mistaken," said the lawyer, "but I wanted to add that I
expected better judgement from you than from the others, especially as I've given you more
insight into the workings of the court and my own activities than I normally do. And now I'm
forced to accept that, despite everything, you have too little trust in me. You don't make it
easy for me." How the lawyer was humiliating himself to K.! He was showing no regard for
the dignity of his position, which on this point, must have been at its most sensitive. And why
did he do that? He did seem to be very busy as a lawyer as well a rich man, neither the loss of
income nor the loss of a client could have been of much importance to him in themselves. He
was moreover unwell and should have been thinking of passing work on to others. And
despite all that he held on tightly to K. Why? Was it something personal for his uncle's sake,
or did he really see K.'s case as one that was exceptional and hoped to be able to distinguish
himself with it, either for K.'s sake or—and this possibility could never be excluded—for his
friends at the court. It was not possible to learn anything by looking at him, even though K.
was scrutinizing him quite brazenly. It could almost be supposed he was deliberately hiding
his thoughts as he waited to see what effect his words would have. But he clearly deemed K.'s
silence to be favourable for himself and he continued, "You will have noticed the size of my
office, but that I don't employ any staff to help me. That used to be quite different, there was
a time when several young lawyers were working for me but now I work alone. This is partly
to do with changes in the way I do business, in that I concentrate nowadays more and more
on matters such as your own case, and partly to do with the ever deeper understanding that I
acquire from these legal matters. I found that I could never let anyone else deal with this sort
of work unless I wanted to harm both the client and the job I had taken on. But the decision to
do all the work myself had its obvious result: I was forced to turn almost everyone away who
asked me to represent them and could only accept those I was especially interested in—well
86
there are enough creatures who leap at every crumb I throw down, and they're not so very far
away. Most importantly, I became ill from over-work. But despite that I don't regret my
decision, quite possibly I should have turned more cases away than I did, but it did turn out to
be entirely necessary for me to devote myself fully to the cases I did take on, and the
successful results showed that it was worth it. I once read a description of the difference
between representing someone in ordinary legal matters and in legal matters of this sort, and
the writer expressed it very well. This is what he said: some lawyers lead their clients on a
thread until judgement is passed, but there are others who immediately lift their clients onto
their shoulders and carry them all the way to the judgement and beyond. That's just how it is.
But it was quite true when I said I never regret all this work. But if, as in your case, they are
so fully misunderstood, well, then I come very close to regretting it." All this talking did
more to make K. impatient than to persuade him. From the way the lawyer was speaking, K.
thought he could hear what he could expect if he gave in, the delays and excuses would begin
again, reports of how the documents were progressing, how the mood of the court officials
had improved, as well as all the enormous difficulties—in short all that he had heard so many
times before would be brought out again even more fully, he would try to mislead K. with
hopes that were never specified and to make him suffer with threats that were never clear. He
had to put a stop to that, so he said, "What will you undertake on my behalf if you continue to
represent me?" The lawyer quietly accepted even this insulting question, and answered, "I
should continue with what I've already been doing for you." "That's just what I thought," said
K., "and now you don't need to say another word." "I will make one more attempt," said the
lawyer as if whatever had been making K. so annoyed was affecting him too. "You see, I
have the impression that you have not only misjudged the legal assistance I have given you
but also that that misjudgement has led you to behave in this way, you seem, although you
are the accused, to have been treated too well or, to put it a better way, handled with neglect,
with apparent neglect. Even that has its reason; it is often better to be in chains than to be
free. But I would like to show you how other defendants are treated, perhaps you will succeed
in learning something from it. What I will do is I will call Block in, unlock the door and sit
down here beside the bedside table." "Be glad to," said K., and did as the lawyer suggested;
he was always ready to learn something new. But to make sure of himself for any event he
added, "but you do realise that you are no longer to be my lawyer, don't you?" "Yes," said the
lawyer. "But you can still change your mind today if you want to." He lay back down in the
bed, pulled the quilt up to his chin and turned to face the wall. Then he rang.
Leni appeared almost the moment he had done so. She looked hurriedly at K. and the lawyer
to try and find out what had happened; she seemed to be reassured by the sight of K. sitting
calmly at the lawyer's bed. She smiled and nodded to K., K. looked blankly back at her.
"Fetch Block," said the lawyer. But instead of going to fetch him, Leni just went to the door
and called out, "Block! To the lawyer!" Then, probably because the lawyer had turned his
face to the wall and was paying no attention, she slipped in behind K.'s chair. From then on,
she bothered him by leaning forward over the back of the chair or, albeit very tenderly and
carefully, she would run her hands through his hair and over his cheeks. K. eventually tried to
stop her by taking hold of one hand, and after some resistance Leni let him keep hold of it.
Block came as soon as he was called, but he remained standing in the doorway and seemed to
be wondering whether he should enter or not. He raised his eyebrows and lowered his head as
if listening to find out whether the order to attend the lawyer would be repeated. K. could
have encouraged him to enter, but he had decided to make a final break not only with the
lawyer but with everything in his home, so he kept himself motionless. Leni was also silent.
Block noticed that at least no-one was chasing him away, and, on tiptoe, he entered the room,
his face was tense, his hands were clenched behind his back. He left the door open in case he
needed to go back again. K. did not even glance at him, he looked instead only at the thick
87
quilt under which the lawyer could not be seen as he had squeezed up very close to the wall.
Then his voice was heard: "Block here?" he asked. Block had already crept some way into
the room but this question seemed to give him first a shove in the breast and then another in
the back, he seemed about to fall but remained standing, deeply bowed, and said, "At your
service, sir." "What do you want?" asked the lawyer, "you've come at a bad time." "Wasn't I
summoned?" asked Block, more to himself than the lawyer. He held his hands in front of
himself as protection and would have been ready to run away any moment. "You were
summoned," said the lawyer, "but you have still come at a bad time." Then, after a pause he
added, "You always come at a bad time." When the lawyer started speaking Block had
stopped looking at the bed but stared rather into one of the corners, just listening, as if the
light from the speaker were brighter than Block could bear to look at. But it was also difficult
for him to listen, as the lawyer was speaking into the wall and speaking quickly and quietly.
"Would you like me to go away again, sir?" asked Block. "Well you're here now," said the
lawyer. "Stay!" It was as if the lawyer had not done as Block had wanted but instead
threatened him with a stick, as now Block really began to shake. "I went to see," said the
lawyer, "the third judge yesterday, a friend of mine, and slowly brought the conversation
round to the subject of you. Do you want to know what he said?" "Oh, yes please," said
Block. The lawyer did not answer immediately, so Block repeated his request and lowered his
head as if about to kneel down. But then K. spoke to him: "What do you think you're doing?"
he shouted. Leni had wanted to stop him from calling out and so he took hold of her other
hand. It was not love that made him squeeze it and hold on to it so tightly, she sighed
frequently and tried to disengage her hands from him. But Block was punished for K.'s
outburst, as the lawyer asked him, "Who is your lawyer?" "You are, sir," said Block. "And
who besides me?" the lawyer asked. "No-one besides you, sir," said Block. "And let there be
no-one besides me," said the lawyer. Block fully understood what that meant, he glowered at
K., shaking his head violently. If these actions had been translated into words they would
have been coarse insults. K. had been friendly and willing to discuss his own case with
someone like this! "I won't disturb you any more," said K., leaning back in his chair. "You
can kneel down or creep on all fours, whatever you like. I won't bother with you any more."
But Block still had some sense of pride, at least where K. was concerned, and he went
towards him waving his fists, shouting as loudly as he dared while the lawyer was there.
"You shouldn't speak to me like that, that's not allowed. Why are you insulting me?
Especially here in front of the lawyer, where both of us, you and me, we're only tolerated
because of his charity. You're not a better person than me, you've been accused of something
too, you're facing a charge too. If, in spite of that, you're still a gentleman then I'm just as
much a gentleman as you are, if not even more so. And I want to be spoken to as a
gentleman, especially by you. If you think being allowed to sit there and quietly listen while I
creep on all fours as you put it makes you something better than me, then there's an old legal
saying you ought to bear in mind: If you're under suspicion it's better to be moving than still,
as if you're still you can be in the pan of the scales without knowing it and be weighed along
with your sins." K. said nothing. He merely looked in amazement at this distracted being, his
eyes completely still. He had gone through such changes in just the last few hours! Was it the
trial that was throwing him from side to side in this way and stopped him knowing who was
friend and who was foe? Could he not see the lawyer was deliberately humiliating him and
had no other purpose today than to show off his power to K., and perhaps even thereby
subjugate K.? But if Block was incapable of seeing that, or if he so feared the lawyer that no
such insight would even be of any use to him, how was it that he was either so sly or so bold
as to lie to the lawyer and conceal from him the fact that he had other lawyers working on his
behalf? And how did he dare to attack K., who could betray his secret any time he liked? But
he dared even more than this, he went to the lawyer's bed and began there to make complaints
88
about K. "Dr. Huld, sir," he said, "did you hear the way this man spoke to me? You can count
the length of his trial in hours, and he wants to tell me what to do when I've been involved in
a legal case for five years. He even insults me. He doesn't know anything, but he insults me,
when I, as far as my weak ability allows, when I've made a close study of how to behave with
the court, what we ought to do and what the court practices are." "Don't let anyone bother
you," said the lawyer, "and do what seems to you to be right." "I will," said Block, as if
speaking to himself to give himself courage, and with a quick glance to the side he knelt
down close beside the bed. "I'm kneeling now, Dr. Huld, sir," he said. But the lawyer
remained silent. With one hand, Block carefully stroked the bed cover. In the silence while he
did so, Leni, as she freed herself from K.'s hands, said, "You're hurting me. Let go of me. I'm
going over to Block." She went over to him and sat on the edge of the bed. Block was very
pleased at this and with lively, but silent, gestures he immediately urged her to intercede for
him with the lawyer. It was clear that he desperately needed to be told something by the
lawyer, although perhaps only so that he could make use of the information with his other
lawyers. Leni probably knew very well how the lawyer could be brought round, pointed to
his hand and pursed her lips as if making a kiss. Block immediately performed the hand-kiss
and, at further urging from Leni, repeated it twice more. But the lawyer continued to be
silent. Then Leni leant over the lawyer, as she stretched out, the attractive shape of her body
could be seen, and, bent over close to his face, she stroked his long white hair. That now
forced him to give an answer. "I'm rather wary of telling him," said the lawyer, and his head
could be seen shaking slightly, perhaps so that he would feel the pressure of Leni's hand
better. Block listened closely with his head lowered, as if by listening he were breaking an
order. "What makes you so wary about it?" asked Leni. K. had the feeling he was listening to
a contrived dialogue that had been repeated many times, that would be repeated many times
more, and that for Block alone it would never lose its freshness. "What has his behaviour
been like today?" asked the lawyer instead of an answer. Before Leni said anything she
looked down at Block and watched him a short while as he raised his hands towards her and
rubbed them together imploringly. Finally she gave a serious nod, turned back to the lawyer
and said, "He's been quiet and industrious." This was an elderly businessman, a man whose
beard was long, and he was begging a young girl to speak on his behalf. Even if there was
some plan behind what he did, there was nothing that could reinstate him in the eyes of his
fellow man. K. could not understand how the lawyer could have thought this performance
would win him over. Even if he had done nothing earlier to make him want to leave then this
scene would have done so. It was almost humiliating even for the onlooker. So these were the
lawyer's methods, which K. fortunately had not been exposed to for long, to let the client
forget about the whole world and leave him with nothing but the hope of reaching the end of
his trial by this deluded means. He was no longer a client, he was the lawyer's dog. If the
lawyer had ordered him to crawl under the bed as if it were a kennel and to bark out from
under it, then he would have done so with enthusiasm. K. listened to all of this, testing it and
thinking it over as if he had been given the task of closely observing everything spoken here,
inform a higher office about it and write a report. "And what has he been doing all day?"
asked the lawyer. "I kept him locked in the maid's room all day," said Leni, "so that he
wouldn't stop me doing my work. That's where he usually stays. From time to time I looked
in through the spyhole to see what he was doing, and each time he was kneeling on the bed
and reading the papers you gave him, propped up on the window sill. That made a good
impression on me; as the window only opens onto an air shaft and gives hardly any light. It
showed how obedient he is that he was even reading in those conditions." "I'm pleased to
hear it," said the lawyer. "But did he understand what he was reading?" While this
conversation was going on, Block continually moved his lips and was clearly formulating the
answers he hoped Leni would give. "Well I can't give you any certain answer to that of
89
course," said Leni, "but I could see that he was reading thoroughly. He spent all day reading
the same page, running his finger along the lines. Whenever I looked in on him he sighed as
if this reading was a lot of work for him. I expect the papers you gave him were very hard to
understand." "Yes," said the lawyer, "they certainly are that. And I really don't think he
understood anything of them. But they should at least give him some inkling of just how hard
a struggle it is and how much work it is for me to defend him. And who am I doing all this
hard work for? I'm doing it—it's laughable even to say it—I'm doing it for Block. He ought to
realise what that means, too. Did he study without a pause?" "Almost without a pause,"
answered Leni. "Just the once he asked me for a drink of water, so I gave him a glassful
through the window. Then at eight o'clock I let him out and gave him something to eat."
Block glanced sideways at K., as if he were being praised and had to impress K. as well. He
now seemed more optimistic, he moved more freely and rocked back and forth on his knees.
This made his astonishment all the more obvious when he heard the following words from
the lawyer: "You speak well of him," said the lawyer, "but that's just what makes it difficult
for me. You see, the judge did not speak well of him at all, neither about Block nor about his
case." "Didn't speak well of him?" asked Leni. "How is that possible?" Block looked at her
with such tension he seemed to think that although the judge's words had been spoken so long
before she would be able to change them in his favour. "Not at all," said the lawyer. "In fact
he became quite cross when I started to talk about Block to him. 'Don't talk to me about
Block,' he said. 'He is my client,' said I. 'You're letting him abuse you,' he said. 'I don't think
his case is lost yet,' said I. 'You're letting him abuse you,' he repeated. 'I don't think so,' said I.
'Block works hard in his case and always knows where it stands. He practically lives with me
so that he always knows what's happening. You don't always find such enthusiasm as that.
He's not very pleasant personally, I grant you, his manners are terrible and he's dirty, but as
far as the trial's concerned he's quite immaculate.' I said immaculate, but I was deliberately
exaggerating. Then he said, 'Block is sly, that's all. He's accumulated plenty of experience
and knows how to delay proceedings. But there's more that he doesn't know than he does.
What do you think he'd say if he learned his trial still hasn't begun, if you told him they
haven't even rung the bell to announce the start of proceedings?' Alright Block, alright," said
the lawyer, as at these words Block had begun to raise himself on his trembling knees and
clearly wanted to plead for some explanation. It was the first time the lawyer had spoken any
clear words directly to Block. He looked down with his tired eyes, half blankly and half at
Block, who slowly sank back down on his knees under this gaze. "What the judge said has no
meaning for you," said the lawyer. "You needn't be frightened at every word. If you do it
again I won't tell you anything else at all. It's impossible to start a sentence without you
looking at me as if you were receiving your final judgement. You should be ashamed of
yourself here in front of my client! And you're destroying the trust he has for me. Just what is
it you want? You're still alive, you're still under my protection. There's no point in worrying!
Somewhere you've read that the final judgement can often come without warning, from
anyone at any time. And, in the right circumstances, that's basically true, but it's also true that
I dislike your anxiety and fear and see that you don't have the trust in me you should have.
Now what have I just said? I repeated something said by one of the judges. You know that
there are so many various opinions about the procedure that they form into a great big pile
and nobody can make any sense of them. This judge, for instance, sees proceedings as
starting at a different point from where I do. A difference of opinion, nothing more. At a
certain stage in the proceedings tradition has it that a sign is given by ringing a bell. This
judge sees that as the point at which proceedings begin. I can't set out all the opinions
opposed to that view here, and you wouldn't understand it anyway, suffice it to say that there
are many reasons to disagree with him." Embarrassed, Block ran his fingers through the pile
of the carpet, his anxiety about what the judge had said had let him forget his inferior status
90
towards the lawyer for a while, he thought only about himself and turned the judge's words
round to examine them from all sides. "Block," said Leni, as if reprimanding him, and, taking
hold of the collar of his coat, pulled him up slightly higher. "Leave the carpet alone and listen
to what the lawyer is saying."
This chapter was left unfinished.
91
Chapter IX
In the Cathedral
A very important Italian business contact of the bank had come to visit the city for the first
time and K. was given the task of showing him some of its cultural sights. At any other time
he would have seen this job as an honour but now, when he was finding it hard even to
maintain his current position in the bank, he accepted it only with reluctance. Every hour that
he could not be in the office was a cause of concern for him, he was no longer able to make
use of his time in the office anything like as well as he had previously, he spent many hours
merely pretending to do important work, but that only increased his anxiety about not being
in the office. Then he sometimes thought he saw the deputy director, who was always
watching, come into K.'s office, sit at his desk, look through his papers, receive clients who
had almost become old friends of K., and lure them away from him, perhaps he even
discovered mistakes, mistakes that seemed to threaten K. from a thousand directions when he
was at work now, and which he could no longer avoid. So now, if he was ever asked to leave
the office on business or even needed to make a short business trip, however much an honour
it seemed—and tasks of this sort happened to have increased substantially recently—there
was always the suspicion that they wanted to get him out of his office for a while and check
his work, or at least the idea that they thought he was dispensable. It would not have been
difficult for him to turn down most of these jobs, but he did not dare to do so because, if his
fears had the slightest foundation, turning the jobs down would have been an
acknowledgement of them. For this reason, he never demurred from accepting them, and
even when he was asked to go on a tiring business trip lasting two days he said nothing about
having to go out in the rainy autumn weather when he had a severe chill, just in order to
avoid the risk of not being asked to go. When, with a raging headache, he arrived back from
this trip he learned that he had been chosen to accompany the Italian business contact the
following day. The temptation for once to turn the job down was very great, especially as it
had no direct connection with business, but there was no denying that social obligations
towards this business contact were in themselves important enough, only not for K., who
knew quite well that he needed some successes at work if he was to maintain his position
there and that, if he failed in that, it would not help him even if this Italian somehow found
him quite charming; he did not want to be removed from his workplace for even one day, as
the fear of not being allowed back in was too great, he knew full well that the fear was
exaggerated but it still made him anxious. However, in this case it was almost impossible to
think of an acceptable excuse, his knowledge of Italian was not great but still good enough;
the deciding factor was that K. had earlier known a little about art history and this had
become widely known around the bank in extremely exaggerated form, and that K. had been
a member of the Society for the Preservation of City Monuments, albeit only for business
reasons. It was said that this Italian was an art lover, so the choice of K. to accompany him
was a matter of course.
It was a very rainy and stormy morning when K., in a foul temper at the thought of the day
ahead of him, arrived early at seven o'clock in the office so that he could at least do some
work before his visitor would prevent him. He had spent half the night studying a book of
Italian grammar so that he would be somewhat prepared and was very tired; his desk was less
attractive to him than the window where he had spent far too much time sitting of late, but he
resisted the temptation and sat down to his work. Unfortunately, just then the servitor came in
and reported that the director had sent him to see whether the chief clerk was already in his
92
office; if he was, then would he please be so kind as to come to his reception room as the
gentleman from Italy was already there. "I'll come straight away," said K. He put a small
dictionary in his pocket, took a guide to the city's tourist sites under his arm that he had
compiled for strangers, and went through the deputy director's office into that of the director.
He was glad he had come into the office so early and was able to be of service immediately,
nobody could seriously have expected that of him. The deputy director's office was, of
course, still as empty as the middle of the night, the servitor had probably been asked to
summon him too but without success. As K. entered the reception room two men stood up
from the deep armchairs where they had been sitting. The director gave him a friendly smile,
he was clearly very glad that K. was there, he immediately introduced him to the Italian who
shook K.'s hand vigorously and joked that somebody was an early riser. K. did not quite
understand whom he had in mind, it was moreover an odd expression to use and it took K. a
little while to guess its meaning. He replied with a few bland phrases which the Italian
received once more with a laugh, passing his hand nervously and repeatedly over his bluegrey, bushy moustache. This moustache was obviously perfumed, it was almost tempting to
come close to it and sniff. When they had all sat down and begun a light preliminary
conversation, K. was disconcerted to notice that he understood no more than fragments of
what the Italian said. When he spoke very calmly he understood almost everything, but that
was very infrequent, mostly the words gushed from his mouth and he seemed to be enjoying
himself so much his head shook. When he was talking in this way his speech was usually
wrapped up in some kind of dialect which seemed to K. to have nothing to do with Italian but
which the director not only understood but also spoke, although K. ought to have foreseen
this as the Italian came from the south of his country where the director had also spent several
years. Whatever the cause, K. realised that the possibility of communicating with the Italian
had been largely taken from him, even his French was difficult to understand, and his
moustache concealed the movements of his lips which might have offered some help in
understanding what he said. K. began to anticipate many difficulties, he gave up trying to
understand what the Italian said—with the director there, who could understand him so
easily, it would have been pointless effort—and for the time being did no more than scowl at
the Italian as he relaxed sitting deep but comfortable in the armchair, as he frequently pulled
at his short, sharply tailored jacket and at one time lifted his arms in the air and moved his
hands freely to try and depict something that K. could not grasp, even though he was leaning
forward and did not let the hands out of his sight. K. had nothing to occupy himself but
mechanically watch the exchange between the two men and his tiredness finally made itself
felt, to his alarm, although fortunately in good time, he once caught himself nearly getting up,
turning round and leaving. Eventually the Italian looked at the clock and jumped up. After
taking his leave from the director he turned to K., pressing himself so close to him that K. had
to push his chair back just so that he could move. The director had, no doubt, seen the anxiety
in K.'s eyes as he tried to cope with this dialect of Italian, he joined in with this conversation
in a way that was so adroit and unobtrusive that he seemed to be adding no more than minor
comments, whereas in fact he was swiftly and patiently breaking into what the Italian said so
that K. could understand. K. learned in this way that the Italian first had a few business
matters to settle, that he unfortunately had only a little time at his disposal, that he certainly
did not intend to rush round to see every monument in the city, that he would much rather—
at least as long as K. would agree, it was entirely his decision—just see the cathedral and to
do so thoroughly. He was extremely pleased to be accompanied by someone who was so
learned and so pleasant—by this he meant K., who was occupied not with listening to the
Italian but the director—and asked if he would be so kind, if the time was suitable, to meet
him in the cathedral in two hours' time at about ten o'clock. He hoped he would certainly be
able to be there at that time. K. made an appropriate reply, the Italian shook first the director's
93
hand and then K.'s, then the director's again and went to the door, half turned to the two men
who followed him and continuing to talk without a break. K. remained together with the
director for a short while, although the director looked especially unhappy today. He thought
he needed to apologise to K. for something and told him—they were standing intimately
close together—he had thought at first he would accompany the Italian himself, but then—he
gave no more precise reason than this—then he decided it would be better to send K. with
him. He should not be surprised if he could not understand the Italian at first, he would be
able to very soon, and even if he really could not understand very much he said it was not so
bad, as it was really not so important for the Italian to be understood. And anyway, K.'s
knowledge of Italian was surprisingly good, the director was sure he would get by very well.
And with that, it was time for K. to go. He spent the time still remaining to him with a
dictionary, copying out obscure words he would need to guide the Italian round the cathedral.
It was an extremely irksome task, servitors brought him the mail, bank staff came with
various queries and, when they saw that K. was busy, stood by the door and did not go away
until he had listened to them, the deputy director did not miss the opportunity to disturb K.
and came in frequently, took the dictionary from his hand and flicked through its pages,
clearly for no purpose, when the door to the ante-room opened even clients would appear
from the half-darkness and bow timidly to him—they wanted to attract his attention but were
not sure whether he had seen them—all this activity was circling around K. with him at its
centre while he compiled the list of words he would need, then looked them up in the
dictionary, then wrote them out, then practised their pronunciation and finally tried to learn
them by heart. The good intentions he had had earlier, though, seemed to have left him
completely, it was the Italian who had caused him all this effort and sometimes he became so
angry with him that he buried the dictionary under some papers firmly intending to do no
more preparation, but then he realised he could not walk up and down in the cathedral with
the Italian without saying a word, so, in an even greater rage, he pulled the dictionary back
out again.
At exactly half past nine, just when he was about to leave, there was a telephone call for him,
Leni wished him good morning and asked how he was, K. thanked her hurriedly and told her
it was impossible for him to talk now as he had to go to the cathedral. "To the cathedral?"
asked Leni. "Yes, to the cathedral." "What do you have to go to the cathedral for?" said Leni.
K. tried to explain it to her briefly, but he had hardly begun when Leni suddenly said,
"They're harassing you." One thing that K. could not bear was pity that he had not wanted or
expected, he took his leave of her with two words, but as he put the receiver back in its place
he said, half to himself and half to the girl on the other end of the line who could no longer
hear him, "Yes, they're harassing me."
By now the time was late and there was almost a danger he would not be on time. He took a
taxi to the cathedral, at the last moment he had remembered the album that he had had no
opportunity to give to the Italian earlier and so took it with him now. He held it on his knees
and drummed impatiently on it during the whole journey. The rain had eased off slightly but
it was still damp, chilly and dark, it would be difficult to see anything in the cathedral but
standing about on cold flagstones might well make K.'s chill much worse. The square in front
of the cathedral was quite empty, K. remembered how even as a small child he had noticed
that nearly all the houses in this narrow square had the curtains at their windows closed most
of the time, although today, with the weather like this, it was more understandable. The
cathedral also seemed quite empty, of course no-one would think of going there on a day like
this. K. hurried along both the side naves but saw no-one but an old woman who, wrapped up
in a warm shawl, was kneeling at a picture of the Virgin Mary and staring up at it. Then, in
the distance, he saw a church official who limped away through a doorway in the wall. K. had
94
arrived on time, it had struck ten just as he was entering the building, but the Italian still was
not there. K. went back to the main entrance, stood there indecisively for a while, and then
walked round the cathedral in the rain in case the Italian was waiting at another entrance. He
was nowhere to be found. Could the director have misunderstood what time they had agreed
on? How could anyone understand someone like that properly anyway? Whatever had
happened, K. would have to wait for him for at least half an hour. As he was tired he wanted
to sit down, he went back inside the cathedral, he found something like a small carpet on one
of the steps, he moved it with his foot to a nearby pew, wrapped himself up tighter in his coat,
put the collar up and sat down. To pass the time he opened the album and flicked through the
pages a little but soon had to give up as it became so dark that when he looked up he could
hardly make out anything in the side nave next to him.
In the distance there was a large triangle of candles flickering on the main altar, K. was not
certain whether he had seen them earlier. Perhaps they had only just been lit. Church staff
creep silently as part of their job, you don't notice them. When K. happened to turn round he
also saw a tall, stout candle attached to a column not far behind him. It was all very pretty,
but totally inadequate to illuminate the pictures which were usually left in the darkness of the
side altars, and seemed to make the darkness all the deeper. It was discourteous of the Italian
not to come but it was also sensible of him, there would have been nothing to see, they would
have had to content themselves with seeking out a few pictures with K.'s electric pocket torch
and looking at them one small part at a time. K. went over to a nearby side chapel to see what
they could have hoped for, he went up a few steps to a low marble railing and leant over it to
look at the altar picture by the light of his torch. The eternal light hung disturbingly in front
of it. The first thing that K. partly saw and partly guessed at was a large knight in armour who
was shown at the far edge of the painting. He was leaning on his sword that he had stuck into
the naked ground in front of him where only a few blades of grass grew here and there. He
seemed to be paying close attention to something that was being played out in front of him. It
was astonishing to see how he stood there without going any closer. Perhaps it was his job to
stand guard. It was a long time since K. had looked at any pictures and he studied the knight
for a long time even though he had continually to blink as he found it difficult to bear the
green light of his torch. Then when he moved the light to the other parts of the picture he
found an interment of Christ shown in the usual way, it was also a comparatively new
painting. He put his torch away and went back to his place.
There seemed to be no point in waiting for the Italian any longer, but outside it was certainly
raining heavily, and as it was not so cold in the cathedral as K. had expected he decided to
stay there for the time being. Close by him was the great pulpit, there were two plain golden
crosses attached to its little round roof which were lying almost flat and whose tips crossed
over each other. The outside of the pulpit's balustrade was covered in green foliage which
continued down to the column supporting it, little angels could be seen among the leaves,
some of them lively and some of them still. K. walked up to the pulpit and examined it from
all sides, its stonework had been sculpted with great care, it seemed as if the foliage had
trapped a deep darkness between and behind its leaves and held it there prisoner, K. lay his
hand in one of these gaps and cautiously felt the stone, until then he had been totally unaware
of this pulpit's existence. Then K. happened to notice one of the church staff standing behind
the next row of pews, he wore a loose, creased, black cassock, he held a snuff box in his left
hand and he was watching K. Now what does he want? thought K. Do I seem suspicious to
him? Does he want a tip? But when the man in the cassock saw that K. had noticed him he
raised his right hand, a pinch of snuff still held between two fingers, and pointed in some
vague direction. It was almost impossible to understand what this behaviour meant, K. waited
a while longer but the man in the cassock did not stop gesturing with his hand and even
95
augmented it by nodding his head. "Now what does he want?" asked K. quietly, he did not
dare call out loud here; but then he drew out his purse and pushed his way through the nearest
pews to reach the man. He, however, immediately gestured to turn down this offer, shrugged
his shoulders and limped away. As a child K. had imitated riding on a horse with the same
sort of movement as this limp. "This old man is like a child," thought K., "he doesn't have the
sense for anything more than serving in a church. Look at the way he stops when I stop, and
how he waits to see whether I'll continue." With a smile, K. followed the old man all the way
up the side nave and almost as far as the main altar, all this time the old man continued to
point at something but K. deliberately avoided looking round, he was only pointing in order
to make it harder for K. to follow him. Eventually, K. did stop following, he did not want to
worry the old man too much, and he also did not want to frighten him away completely in
case the Italian turned up after all.
When he entered the central nave to go back to where he had left the album, he noticed a
small secondary pulpit on a column almost next to the stalls by the altar where the choir sat.
It was very simple, made of plain white stone, and so small that from a distance it looked like
an empty niche where the statue of a saint ought to have been. It certainly would have been
impossible for the priest to take a full step back from the balustrade, and, although there was
no decoration on it, the top of the pulpit curved in exceptionally low so that a man of average
height would not be able stand upright and would have to remain bent forward over the
balustrade. In all, it looked as if it had been intended to make the priest suffer, it was
impossible to understand why this pulpit would be needed as there were also the other ones
available which were large and so artistically decorated.
And K. would certainly not have noticed this little pulpit if there had not been a lamp
fastened above it, which usually meant there was a sermon about to be given. So was a
sermon to be given now? In this empty church? K. looked down at the steps which, pressed
close against the column, led up to the pulpit. They were so narrow they seemed to be there
as decoration on the column rather than for anyone to use. But under the pulpit—K. grinned
in astonishment—there really was a priest standing with his hand on the handrail ready to
climb the steps and looking at K. Then he nodded very slightly, so that K. crossed himself
and genuflected as he should have done earlier. With a little swing, the priest went up into the
pulpit with short fast steps. Was there really a sermon about to begin? Maybe the man in the
cassock had not been really so demented, and had meant to lead K.'s way to the preacher,
which in this empty church would have been very necessary. And there was also, somewhere
in front of a picture of the Virgin Mary, an old woman who should have come to hear the
sermon. And if there was to be a sermon why had it not been introduced on the organ? But
the organ remained quiet and merely looked out weakly from the darkness of its great height.
K. now considered whether he should leave as quickly as possible, if he did not do it now
there would be no chance of doing so during the sermon and he would have to stay there for
as long as it lasted, he had lost so much time when he should have been in his office, there
had long been no need for him to wait for the Italian any longer, he looked at his watch, it
was eleven. But could there really be a sermon given? Could K. constitute the entire
congregation? How could he when he was just a stranger who wanted to look at the church?
That, basically, was all he was. The idea of a sermon, now, at eleven o'clock, on a workday,
in hideous weather, was nonsense. The priest—there was no doubt that he was a priest, a
young man with a smooth, dark face—was clearly going up there just to put the lamp out
after somebody had lit it by mistake.
But there had been no mistake, the priest seemed rather to check that the lamp was lit and
turned it a little higher, then he slowly turned to face the front and leant down on the
96
balustrade gripping its angular rail with both hands. He stood there like that for a while and,
without turning his head, looked around. K. had moved back a long way and leant his elbows
on the front pew. Somewhere in the church—he could not have said exactly where—he could
make out the man in the cassock hunched under his bent back and at peace, as if his work
were completed. In the cathedral it was now very quiet! But K. would have to disturb that
silence, he had no intention of staying there; if it was the priest's duty to preach at a certain
time regardless of the circumstances then he could, and he could do it without K.'s taking
part, and K.'s presence would do nothing to augment the effect of it. So K. began slowly to
move, felt his way on tiptoe along the pew, arrived at the broad aisle and went along it
without being disturbed, except for the sound of his steps, however light, which rang out on
the stone floor and resounded from the vaulting, quiet but continuous at a repeating, regular
pace. K. felt slightly abandoned as, probably observed by the priest, he walked by himself
between the empty pews, and the size of the cathedral seemed to be just at the limit of what a
man could bear. When he arrived back at where he had been sitting he did not hesitate but
simply reached out for the album he had left there and took it with him. He had nearly left the
area covered by pews and was close to the empty space between himself and the exit when,
for the first time, he heard the voice of the priest. A powerful and experienced voice. It
pierced through the reaches of the cathedral ready waiting for it! But the priest was not
calling out to the congregation, his cry was quite unambiguous and there was no escape from
it, he called "Josef K.!"
K. stood still and looked down at the floor. In theory he was still free, he could have carried
on walking, through one of three dark little wooden doors not far in front of him and away
from there. It would simply mean he had not understood, or that he had understood but chose
not to pay attention to it. But if he once turned round he would be trapped, then he would
have acknowledged that he had understood perfectly well, that he really was the Josef K. the
priest had called to and that he was willing to follow. If the priest had called out again K.
would certainly have carried on out the door, but everything was silent as K. also waited, he
turned his head slightly as he wanted to see what the priest was doing now. He was merely
standing in the pulpit as before, but it was obvious that he had seen K. turn his head. If K. did
not now turn round completely it would have been like a child playing hide and seek. He did
so, and the priest beckoned him with his finger. As everything could now be done openly he
ran—because of curiosity and the wish to get it over with—with long flying leaps towards the
pulpit. At the front pews he stopped, but to the priest he still seemed too far away, he reached
out his hand and pointed sharply down with his finger to a place immediately in front of the
pulpit. And K. did as he was told, standing in that place he had to bend his head a long way
back just to see the priest. "You are Josef K.," said the priest, and raised his hand from the
balustrade to make a gesture whose meaning was unclear. "Yes," said K., he considered how
freely he had always given his name in the past, for some time now it had been a burden to
him, now there were people who knew his name whom he had never seen before, it had been
so nice first to introduce yourself and only then for people to know who you were. "You have
been accused," said the priest, especially gently. "Yes," said K., "so I have been informed."
"Then you are the one I am looking for," said the priest. "I am the prison chaplain." "I see,"
said K. "I had you summoned here," said the priest, "because I wanted to speak to you." "I
knew nothing of that," said K. "I came here to show the cathedral to a gentleman from Italy."
"That is beside the point," said the priest. "What are you holding in your hand? Is it a prayer
book?" "No," answered K., "it's an album of the city's tourist sights." "Put it down," said the
priest. K. threw it away with such force that it flapped open and rolled across the floor,
tearing its pages. "Do you know your case is going badly?" asked the priest. "That's how it
seems to me too," said K. "I've expended a lot of effort on it, but so far with no result.
Although I do still have some documents to submit." "How do you imagine it will end?"
97
asked the priest. "At first I thought it was bound to end well," said K., "but now I have my
doubts about it. I don't know how it will end. Do you know?" "I don't," said the priest, "but I
fear it will end badly. You are considered guilty. Your case will probably not even go beyond
a minor court. Provisionally at least, your guilt is seen as proven." "But I'm not guilty," said
K., "there's been a mistake. How is it even possible for someone to be guilty? We're all
human beings here, one like the other." "That is true," said the priest, "but that is how the
guilty speak." "Do you presume I'm guilty too?" asked K. "I make no presumptions about
you," said the priest. "I thank you for that," said K. "but everyone else involved in these
proceedings has something against me and presumes I'm guilty. They even influence those
who aren't involved. My position gets harder all the time." "You don't understand the facts,"
said the priest, "the verdict does not come suddenly, proceedings continue until a verdict is
reached gradually." "I see," said K., lowering his head. "What do you intend to do about your
case next?" asked the priest. "I still need to find help," said K., raising his head to see what
the priest thought of this. "There are still certain possibilities I haven't yet made use of." "You
look for too much help from people you don't know," said the priest disapprovingly, "and
especially from women. Can you really not see that's not the help you need?" "Sometimes, in
fact quite often, I could believe you're right," said K., "but not always. Women have a lot of
power. If I could persuade some of the women I know to work together with me then I would
be certain to succeed. Especially in a court like this that seems to consist of nothing but
woman-chasers. Show the examining judge a woman in the distance and he'll run right over
the desk, and the accused, just to get to her as soon as he can." The priest lowered his head
down to the balustrade, only now did the roof over the pulpit seem to press him down. What
sort of dreadful weather could it be outside? It was no longer just a dull day, it was deepest
night. None of the stained glass in the main window shed even a flicker of light on the
darkness of the walls. And this was the moment when the man in the cassock chose to put out
the candles on the main altar, one by one. "Are you cross with me?" asked K. "Maybe you
don't know what sort of court it is you serve." He received no answer. "Well, it's just my own
experience," said K. Above him there was still silence. "I didn't mean to insult you," said K.
At that, the priest screamed down at K.: "Can you not see two steps in front of you?" He
shouted in anger, but it was also the scream of one who sees another fall and, shocked and
without thinking, screams against his own will.
The two men, then, remained silent for a long time. In the darkness beneath him, the priest
could not possibly have seen K. distinctly, although K. was able to see him clearly by the
light of the little lamp. Why did the priest not come down? He had not given a sermon, he
had only told K. a few things which, if he followed them closely, would probably cause him
more harm than good. But the priest certainly seemed to mean well, it might even be
possible, if he would come down and co-operate with him, it might even be possible for him
to obtain some acceptable piece of advice that could make all the difference, it might, for
instance, be able to show him not so much to influence the proceedings but how to break free
of them, how to evade them, how to live away from them. K. had to admit that this was
something he had had on his mind quite a lot of late. If the priest knew of such a possibility
he might, if K. asked him, let him know about it, even though he was part of the court himself
and even though, when K. had criticised the court, he had held down his gentle nature and
actually shouted at K.
"Would you not like to come down here?" asked K. "If you're not going to give a sermon
come down here with me." "Now I can come down," said the priest, perhaps he regretted
having shouted at K. As he took down the lamp from its hook he said, "to start off with I had
to speak to you from a distance. Otherwise I'm too easily influenced and forget my duty."
98
K. waited for him at the foot of the steps. While he was still on one of the higher steps as he
came down them the priest reached out his hand for K. to shake. "Can you spare me a little of
your time?" asked K. "As much time as you need," said the priest, and passed him the little
lamp for him to carry. Even at close distance the priest did not lose a certain solemnity that
seemed to be part of his character. "You are very friendly towards me," said K., as they
walked up and down beside each other in the darkness of one of the side naves. "That makes
you an exception among all those who belong to the court. I can trust you more than any of
the others I've seen. I can speak openly with you." "Don't fool yourself," said the priest. "How
would I be fooling myself?" asked K. "You fool yourself in the court," said the priest, "it
talks about this self-deceit in the opening paragraphs to the law. In front of the law there is a
doorkeeper. A man from the countryside comes up to the door and asks for entry. But the
doorkeeper says he can't let him in to the law right now. The man thinks about this, and then
he asks if he'll be able to go in later on. 'That's possible,' says the doorkeeper, 'but not now.'
The gateway to the law is open as it always is, and the doorkeeper has stepped to one side, so
the man bends over to try and see in. When the doorkeeper notices this he laughs and says, 'If
you're tempted give it a try, try and go in even though I say you can't. Careful though: I'm
powerful. And I'm only the lowliest of all the doormen. But there's a doorkeeper for each of
the rooms and each of them is more powerful than the last. It's more than I can stand just to
look at the third one.' The man from the country had not expected difficulties like this, the
law was supposed to be accessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks more
closely at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, sees his big hooked nose, his long thin tartar-beard,
and he decides it's better to wait until he has permission to enter. The doorkeeper gives him a
stool and lets him sit down to one side of the gate. He sits there for days and years. He tries to
be allowed in time and again and tires the doorkeeper with his requests. The doorkeeper often
questions him, asking about where he's from and many other things, but these are
disinterested questions such as great men ask, and he always ends up by telling him he still
can't let him in. The man had come well equipped for his journey, and uses everything,
however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper. He accepts everything, but as he does so he says,
'I'll only accept this so that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do.' Over many
years, the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break. He forgets about the other
doormen, and begins to think this one is the only thing stopping him from gaining access to
the law. Over the first few years he curses his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he
becomes old, he just grumbles to himself. He becomes senile, and as he has come to know
even the fleas in the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he has been studying him he
even asks them to help him and change the doorkeeper's mind. Finally his eyes grow dim,
and he no longer knows whether it's really getting darker or just his eyes that are deceiving
him. But he seems now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shine from the darkness
behind the door. He doesn't have long to live now. Just before he dies, he brings together all
his experience from all this time into one question which he has still never put to the
doorkeeper. He beckons to him, as he's no longer able to raise his stiff body. The doorkeeper
has to bend over deeply as the difference in their sizes has changed very much to the
disadvantage of the man. 'What is it you want to know now?' asks the doorkeeper, 'You're
insatiable.' 'Everyone wants access to the law,' says the man, 'how come, over all these years,
no-one but me has asked to be let in?' The doorkeeper can see the man's come to his end, his
hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard, he shouts to him: 'Nobody else could have
got in this way, as this entrance was meant only for you. Now I'll go and close it.'"
"So the doorkeeper cheated the man," said K. immediately, who had been captivated by the
story. "Don't be too quick," said the priest, "don't take somebody else's opinion without
checking it. I told you the story exactly as it was written. There's nothing in there about
cheating." "But it's quite clear," said K., "and your first interpretation of it was quite correct.
99
The doorkeeper gave him the information that would release him only when it could be of no
more use." "He didn't ask him before that," said the priest, "and don't forget he was only a
doorkeeper, and as doorkeeper he did his duty." "What makes you think he did his duty?"
asked K., "He didn't. It might have been his duty to keep everyone else away, but this man is
who the door was intended for and he ought to have let him in." "You're not paying enough
attention to what was written and you're changing the story," said the priest. "According to
the story, there are two important things that the doorkeeper explains about access to the law,
one at the beginning, one at the end. At one place he says he can't allow him in now, and at
the other he says this entrance was intended for him alone. If one of the statements
contradicted the other you would be right and the doorkeeper would have cheated the man
from the country. But there is no contradiction. On the contrary, the first statement even hints
at the second. You could almost say the doorkeeper went beyond his duty in that he offered
the man some prospect of being admitted in the future. Throughout the story, his duty seems
to have been merely to turn the man away, and there are many commentators who are
surprised that the doorkeeper offered this hint at all, as he seems to love exactitude and keeps
strict guard over his position. He stays at his post for many years and doesn't close the gate
until the very end, he's very conscious of the importance of his service, as he says, 'I'm
powerful,' he has respect for his superiors, as he says, 'I'm only the lowliest of the doormen,'
he's not talkative, as through all these years the only questions he asks are 'disinterested,' he's
not corruptible, as when he's offered a gift he says, 'I'll only accept this so that you don't think
there's anything you've failed to do,' as far as fulfilling his duty goes he can be neither ruffled
nor begged, as it says about the man that, 'he tires the doorkeeper with his requests,' even his
external appearance suggests a pedantic character, the big hooked nose and the long, thin,
black tartar-beard. How could any doorkeeper be more faithful to his duty? But in the
doorkeeper's character there are also other features which might be very useful for those who
seek entry to the law, and when he hinted at some possibility in the future it always seemed to
make it clear that he might even go beyond his duty. There's no denying he's a little simpleminded, and that makes him a little conceited. Even if all he said about his power and the
power of the other doorkeepers and how not even he could bear the sight of them—I say even
if all these assertions are right, the way he makes them shows that he's too simple and
arrogant to understand properly. The commentators say about this that, 'correct understanding
of a matter and a misunderstanding of the same matter are not mutually exclusive.' Whether
they're right or not, you have to concede that his simplicity and arrogance, however little they
show, do weaken his function of guarding the entrance, they are defects in the doorkeeper's
character. You also have to consider that the doorkeeper seems to be friendly by nature, he
isn't always just an official. He makes a joke right at the beginning, in that he invites the man
to enter at the same time as maintaining the ban on his entering, and then he doesn't send him
away but gives him, as it says in the text, a stool to sit on and lets him stay by the side of the
door. The patience with which he puts up with the man's requests through all these years, the
little questioning sessions, accepting the gifts, his politeness when he puts up with the man
cursing his fate even though it was the doorkeeper who caused that fate—all these things
seem to want to arouse our sympathy. Not every doorkeeper would have behaved in the same
way. And finally, he lets the man beckon him and he bends deep down to him so that he can
put his last question. There's no more than some slight impatience—the doorkeeper knows
everything's come to its end—shown in the words, 'You're insatiable.' There are many
commentators who go even further in explaining it in this way and think the words, 'you're
insatiable' are an expression of friendly admiration, albeit with some condescension.
However you look at it the figure of the doorkeeper comes out differently from how you
might think." "You know the story better than I do and you've known it for longer," said K.
They were silent for a while. And then K. said, "So you think the man was not cheated, do
100
you?" "Don't get me wrong," said the priest, "I'm just pointing out the different opinions
about it. You shouldn't pay too much attention to people's opinions. The text cannot be
altered, and the various opinions are often no more than an expression of despair over it.
There's even one opinion which says it's the doorkeeper who's been cheated." "That does
seem to take things too far," said K. "How can they argue the doorkeeper has been cheated?"
"Their argument," answered the priest, "is based on the simplicity of the doorkeeper. They
say the doorkeeper doesn't know the inside of the law, only the way into it where he just
walks up and down. They see his ideas of what's inside the law as rather childish, and
suppose he's afraid himself of what he wants to make the man frightened of. Yes, he's more
afraid of it than the man, as the man wants nothing but to go inside the law, even after he's
heard about the terrible doormen there, in contrast to the doorkeeper who doesn't want to go
in, or at least we don't hear anything about it. On the other hand, there are those who say he
must have already been inside the law as he has been taken on into its service and that could
only have been done inside. That can be countered by supposing he could have been given
the job of doorkeeper by somebody calling out from inside, and that he can't have gone very
far inside as he couldn't bear the sight of the third doorkeeper. Nor, through all those years,
does the story say the doorkeeper told the man anything about the inside, other than his
comment about the other doorkeepers. He could have been forbidden to do so, but he hasn't
said anything about that either. All this seems to show he doesn't know anything about what
the inside looks like or what it means, and that that's why he's being deceived. But he's also
being deceived by the man from the country as he's this man's subordinate and doesn't know
it. There's a lot to indicate that he treats the man as his subordinate, I expect you remember,
but those who hold this view would say it's very clear that he really is his subordinate. Above
all, the free man is superior to the man who has to serve another. Now, the man really is free,
he can go wherever he wants, the only thing forbidden to him is entry into the law and, what's
more, there's only one man forbidding him to do so—the doorkeeper. If he takes the stool and
sits down beside the door and stays there all his life he does this of his own free will, there's
nothing in the story to say he was forced to do it. On the other hand, the doorkeeper is kept to
his post by his employment, he's not allowed to go away from it and it seems he's not allowed
to go inside either, not even if he wanted to. Also, although he's in the service of the law he's
only there for this one entrance, therefore he's there only in the service of this one man who
the door's intended for. This is another way in which he's his subordinate. We can take it that
he's been performing this somewhat empty service for many years, through the whole of a
man's life, as it says that a man will come, that means someone old enough to be a man. That
means the doorkeeper will have to wait a long time before his function is fulfilled, he will
have to wait for as long as the man liked, who came to the door of his own free will. Even the
end of the doorkeeper's service is determined by when the man's life ends, so the doorkeeper
remains his subordinate right to the end. And it's pointed out repeatedly that the doorkeeper
seems to know nothing of any of this, although this is not seen as anything remarkable, as
those who hold this view see the doorkeeper as deluded in a way that's far worse, a way that's
to do with his service. At the end, speaking about the entrance he says, 'Now I'll go and close
it,' although at the beginning of the story it says the door to the law is open as it always is, but
if it's always open—always—that means it's open independently of the lifespan of the man
it's intended for, and not even the doorkeeper will be able to close it. There are various
opinions about this, some say the doorkeeper was only answering a question or showing his
devotion to duty or, just when the man was in his last moments, the doorkeeper wanted to
cause him regret and sorrow. There are many who agree that he wouldn't be able to close the
door. They even believe, at the end at least, the doorkeeper is aware, deep down, that he's the
man's subordinate, as the man sees the light that shines out of the entry to the law whereas the
doorkeeper would probably have his back to it and says nothing at all to show there's been
101
any change." "That is well substantiated," said K., who had been repeating some parts of the
priest's explanation to himself in a whisper. "It is well substantiated, and now I too think the
doorkeeper must have been deceived. Although that does not mean I've abandoned what I
thought earlier as the two versions are, to some extent, not incompatible. It's not clear
whether the doorkeeper sees clearly or is deceived. I said the man had been cheated. If the
doorkeeper understands clearly, then there could be some doubt about it, but if the
doorkeeper has been deceived then the man is bound to believe the same thing. That would
mean the doorkeeper is not a cheat but so simple-minded that he ought to be dismissed from
his job immediately; if the doorkeeper is mistaken it will do him no harm but the man will be
harmed immensely." "There you've found another opinion," said the priest, "as there are
many who say the story doesn't give anyone the right to judge the doorkeeper. However he
might seem to us he is still in the service of the law, so he belongs to the law, so he's beyond
what man has a right to judge. In this case we can't believe the doorkeeper is the man's
subordinate. Even if he has to stay at the entrance into the law his service makes him
incomparably more than if he lived freely in the world. The man has come to the law for the
first time and the doorkeeper is already there. He's been given his position by the law, to
doubt his worth would be to doubt the law." "I can't say I'm in complete agreement with this
view," said K. shaking his head, "as if you accept it you'll have to accept that everything said
by the doorkeeper is true. But you've already explained very fully that that's not possible."
"No," said the priest, "you don't need to accept everything as true, you only have to accept it
as necessary." "Depressing view," said K. "The lie made into the rule of the world."
K. said that as if it were his final word but it was not his conclusion. He was too tired to think
about all the ramifications of the story, and the sort of thoughts they led him into were not
familiar to him, unrealistic things, things better suited for officials of the court to discuss than
for him. The simple story had lost its shape, he wanted to shake it off, and the priest who now
felt quite compassionate allowed this and accepted K.'s remarks without comment, even
though his view was certainly very different from K.'s.
In silence, they carried on walking for some time, K. stayed close beside the priest without
knowing where he was. The lamp in his hand had long since gone out. Once, just in front of
him, he thought he could see the statue of a saint by the glitter of the silver on it, although it
quickly disappeared back into the darkness. So that he would not remain entirely dependent
on the priest, K. asked him, "We're now near the main entrance, are we?" "No," said the
priest, "we're a long way from it. Do you already want to go?" K. had not thought of going
until then, but he immediately said, "Yes, certainly, I have to go. I'm the chief clerk in a bank
and there are people waiting for me, I only came here to show a foreign business contact
round the cathedral." "Alright," said the priest offering him his hand, "go then." "But I can't
find my way round in this darkness by myself," said K. "Go to your left as far as the wall,"
said the priest, "then continue alongside the wall without leaving it and you'll find a way out."
The priest had only gone a few paces from him, but K. was already shouting loudly, "Please,
wait!" "I'm waiting," said the priest. "Is there anything else you want from me?" asked K.
"No," said the priest. "You were so friendly to me earlier on," said K., "and you explained
everything, but now you abandon me as if I were nothing to you." "You have to go," said the
priest. "Well, yes," said K., "you need to understand that." "First, you need to understand who
I am," said the priest. "You're the prison chaplain," said K., and went closer to the priest, it
was not so important for him to go straight back to the bank as he had made out, he could
very well stay where he was. "So that means I belong to the court," said the priest. "So why
would I want anything from you? The court doesn't want anything from you. It accepts you
when you come and it lets you go when you leave."
102
Chapter X
End
The evening before K.'s thirty-first birthday—it was about nine o'clock in the evening, the
time when the streets were quiet—two men came to where he lived. In frock coats, pale and
fat, wearing top hats that looked like they could not be taken off their heads. After some brief
formalities at the door of the flat when they first arrived, the same formalities were repeated
at greater length at K.'s door. He had not been notified they would be coming, but K. sat in a
chair near the door, dressed in black as they were, and slowly put on new gloves which
stretched tightly over his fingers and behaved as if he were expecting visitors. He
immediately stood up and looked at the gentlemen inquisitively. "You've come for me then,
have you?" he asked. The gentlemen nodded, one of them indicated the other with the top
hand now in his hand. K. told them he had been expecting a different visitor. He went to the
window and looked once more down at the dark street. Most of the windows on the other side
of the street were also dark already, many of them had the curtains closed. In one of the
windows on the same floor where there was a light on, two small children could be seen
playing with each other inside a playpen, unable to move from where they were, reaching out
for each other with their little hands. "Some ancient, unimportant actors—that's what they've
sent for me," said K. to himself, and looked round once again to confirm this to himself.
"They want to sort me out as cheaply as they can." K. suddenly turned round to face the two
men and asked, "What theatre do you play in?" "Theatre?" asked one of the gentlemen,
turning to the other for assistance and pulling in the corners of his mouth. The other made a
gesture like someone who was dumb, as if he were struggling with some organism causing
him trouble. "You're not properly prepared to answer questions," said K. and went to fetch his
hat.
As soon as they were on the stairs the gentlemen wanted to take K.'s arms, but K. said "Wait
till we're in the street, I'm not ill." But they waited only until the front door before they took
his arms in a way that K. had never experienced before. They kept their shoulders close
behind his, did not turn their arms in but twisted them around the entire length of K.'s arms
and took hold of his hands with a grasp that was formal, experienced and could not be
resisted. K. was held stiff and upright between them, they formed now a single unit so that if
any one of them had been knocked down all of them must have fallen. They formed a unit of
the sort that normally can be formed only by matter that is lifeless.
Whenever they passed under a lamp K. tried to see his companions more clearly, as far as
was possible when they were pressed so close together, as in the dim light of his room this
had been hardly possible. "Maybe they're tenors," he thought as he saw their big double
chins. The cleanliness of their faces disgusted him. He could see the hands that cleaned them,
passing over the corners of their eyes, rubbing at their upper lips, scratching out the creases
on those chins.
When K. noticed that, he stopped, which meant the others had to stop too; they were at the
edge of an open square, devoid of people but decorated with flower beds. "Why did they send
you, of all people!" he cried out, more a shout than a question. The two gentleman clearly
knew no answer to give, they waited, their free arms hanging down, like nurses when the
patient needs to rest. "I will go no further," said K. as if to see what would happen. The
gentlemen did not need to make any answer, it was enough that they did not loosen their grip
on K. and tried to move him on, but K. resisted them. "I'll soon have no need of much
103
strength, I'll use all of it now," he thought. He thought of the flies that tear their legs off
struggling to get free of the flypaper. "These gentleman will have some hard work to do."
Just then, Miss Bürstner came up into the square in front of them from the steps leading from
a small street at a lower level. It was not certain that it was her, although the similarity was,
of course, great. But it did not matter to K. whether it was certainly her anyway, he just
became suddenly aware that there was no point in his resistance. There would be nothing
heroic about it if he resisted, if he now caused trouble for these gentlemen, if in defending
himself he sought to enjoy his last glimmer of life. He started walking, which pleased the
gentlemen and some of their pleasure conveyed itself to him. Now they permitted him to
decide which direction they took, and he decided to take the direction that followed the young
woman in front of them, not so much because he wanted to catch up with her, nor even
because he wanted to keep her in sight for as long as possible, but only so that he would not
forget the reproach she represented for him. "The only thing I can do now," he said to
himself, and his thought was confirmed by the equal length of his own steps with the steps of
the two others, "the only thing I can do now is keep my common sense and do what's needed
right till the end. I always wanted to go at the world and try and do too much, and even to do
it for something that was not too cheap. That was wrong of me. Should I now show them I
learned nothing from facing trial for a year? Should I go out like someone stupid? Should I
let anyone say, after I'm gone, that at the start of the proceedings I wanted to end them, and
that now that they've ended I want to start them again? I don't want anyone to say that. I'm
grateful they sent these unspeaking, uncomprehending men to go with me on this journey,
and that it's been left up to me to say what's necessary."
Meanwhile, the young woman had turned off into a side street, but K. could do without her
now and let his companions lead him. All three of them now, in complete agreement, went
over a bridge in the light of the moon, the two gentlemen were willing to yield to each little
movement made by K. as he moved slightly towards the edge and directed the group in that
direction as a single unit. The moonlight glittered and quivered in the water, which divided
itself around a small island covered in a densely-piled mass of foliage and trees and bushes.
Beneath them, now invisible, there were gravel paths with comfortable benches where K. had
stretched himself out on many summer's days. "I didn't actually want to stop here," he said to
his companions, shamed by their compliance with his wishes. Behind K.'s back one of them
seemed to quietly criticise the other for the misunderstanding about stopping, and then they
went on. They went on up through several streets where policemen were walking or standing
here and there; some in the distance and then some very close. One of them with a bushy
moustache, his hand on the grip of his sword, seemed to have some purpose in approaching
the group, which was hardly unsuspicious. The two gentlemen stopped, the policeman
seemed about to open his mouth, and then K. drove his group forcefully forward. Several
times he looked back cautiously to see if the policeman was following; but when they had a
corner between themselves and the policeman K. began to run, and the two gentlemen,
despite being seriously short of breath, had to run with him.
In this way they quickly left the built up area and found themselves in the fields which, in this
part of town, began almost without any transition zone. There was a quarry, empty and
abandoned, near a building which was still like those in the city. Here the men stopped,
perhaps because this had always been their destination or perhaps because they were too
exhausted to run any further. Here they released their hold on K., who just waited in silence,
and took their top hats off while they looked round the quarry and wiped the sweat off their
brows with their handkerchiefs. The moonlight lay everywhere with the natural peace that is
granted to no other light.
104
After exchanging a few courtesies about who was to carry out the next tasks—the gentlemen
did not seem to have been allocated specific functions—one of them went to K. and took his
coat, his waistcoat, and finally his shirt off him. K. made an involuntary shiver, at which the
gentleman gave him a gentle, reassuring tap on the back. Then he carefully folded the things
up as if they would still be needed, even if not in the near future. He did not want to expose
K. to the chilly night air without moving though, so he took him under the arm and walked up
and down with him a little way while the other gentleman looked round the quarry for a
suitable place. When he had found it he made a sign and the other gentleman escorted him
there. It was near the rockface, there was a stone lying there that had broken loose. The
gentlemen sat K. down on the ground, leant him against the stone and settled his head down
on the top of it. Despite all the effort they went to, and despite all the co-operation shown by
K., his demeanour seemed very forced and hard to believe. So one of the gentlemen asked the
other to grant him a short time while he put K. in position by himself, but even that did
nothing to make it better. In the end they left K. in a position that was far from the best of the
ones they had tried so far. Then one of the gentlemen opened his frock coat and from a sheath
hanging on a belt stretched across his waistcoat he withdrew a long, thin, double-edged
butcher's knife which he held up in the light to test its sharpness. The repulsive courtesies
began once again, one of them passed the knife over K. to the other, who then passed it back
over K. to the first. K. now knew it would be his duty to take the knife as it passed from hand
to hand above him and thrust it into himself. But he did not do it, instead he twisted his neck,
which was still free, and looked around. He was not able to show his full worth, was not able
to take all the work from the official bodies, he lacked the rest of the strength he needed and
this final shortcoming was the fault of whoever had denied it to him. As he looked round, he
saw the top floor of the building next to the quarry. He saw how a light flickered on and the
two halves of a window opened out, somebody, made weak and thin by the height and the
distance, leant suddenly far out from it and stretched his arms out even further. Who was
that? A friend? A good person? Somebody who was taking part? Somebody who wanted to
help? Was he alone? Was it everyone? Would anyone help? Were there objections that had
been forgotten? There must have been some. The logic cannot be refuted, but someone who
wants to live will not resist it. Where was the judge he'd never seen? Where was the high
court he had never reached? He raised both hands and spread out all his fingers.
But the hands of one of the gentleman were laid on K.'s throat, while the other pushed the
knife deep into his heart and twisted it there, twice. As his eyesight failed, K. saw the two
gentlemen cheek by cheek, close in front of his face, watching the result. "Like a dog!" he
said, it was as if the shame of it should outlive him.
THE END